works in terms of resonance and natural frequency.
Solution
The performer must be singing a note that corresponds to the natural frequency of the glass. As the sound wave is directed
at the glass, the glass responds by resonating at the same frequency as the sound wave. With enough energy introduced
into the system, the glass begins to vibrate and eventually shatters.
6.4 Waves
Figure 6.11 Waves in the ocean behave similarly to all other types of waves. (credit: Steve Jurveston, Flickr)
What do we mean when we say something is a wave? The most intuitive and easiest wave to imagine is the familiar water wave.
More precisely, a wave is a disturbance that propagates, or moves from the place it was created. For water waves, the
disturbance is in the surface of the water, perhaps created by a rock thrown into a pond or by a swimmer splashing the surface
repeatedly. For sound waves, the disturbance is a change in air pressure, perhaps created by the oscillating cone inside a
speaker. For earthquakes, there are several types of disturbances, including disturbance of Earth’s surface and pressure
disturbances under the surface. Even radio waves are most easily understood using an analogy with water waves. Visualizing
water waves is useful because there is more to it than just a mental image. Water waves exhibit characteristics common to all
waves, such as amplitude, period, frequency and energy. All wave characteristics can be described by a small set of underlying
principles.
A wave is a disturbance that propagates, or moves from the place it was created. The simplest waves repeat themselves for
several cycles and are associated with simple harmonic motion. Let us start by considering the simplified water wave in Figure
6.12. The wave is an up and down disturbance of the water surface. It causes a sea gull to move up and down in simple
harmonic motion as the wave crests and troughs (peaks and valleys) pass under the bird. The time for one complete up and
down motion is the wave’s period T . The wave’s frequency is f = 1 / T , as usual. The wave itself moves to the right in the
figure. This movement of the wave is actually the disturbance moving to the right, not the water itself (or the bird would move to
the right). We define wave velocity vw to be the speed at which the disturbance moves. Wave velocity is sometimes also called
the propagation velocity or propagation speed, because the disturbance propagates from one location to another.
Misconception Alert
Many people think that water waves push water from one direction to another. In fact, the particles of water tend to stay in
one location, save for moving up and down due to the energy in the wave. The energy moves forward through the water, but
the water stays in one place. If you feel yourself pushed in an ocean, what you feel is the energy of the wave, not a rush of
water.
152 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12