Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment
Sit down with your feet on the ground on a chair that rotates. Lift one of your legs such that it is unbent (straightened out).
Using the other leg, begin to rotate yourself by pushing on the ground. Stop using your leg to push the ground but allow the
chair to rotate. From the origin where you began, sketch the angle, angular velocity, and angular acceleration of your leg as
a function of time in the form of three separate graphs. Estimate the magnitudes of these quantities.
Check Your Understanding
Angular acceleration is a vector, having both magnitude and direction. How do we denote its magnitude and direction?
Illustrate with an example.
Solution
The magnitude of angular acceleration is α and its most common units are rad/s2 . The direction of angular acceleration
along a fixed axis is denoted by a + or a – sign, just as the direction of linear acceleration in one dimension is denoted by a +
or a – sign. For example, consider a gymnast doing a forward flip. Her angular momentum would be parallel to the mat and
to her left. The magnitude of her angular acceleration would be proportional to her angular velocity (spin rate) and her
moment of inertia about her spin axis.
7.2 Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia
If you have ever spun a bike wheel or pushed a merry-go-round, you know that force is needed to change angular velocity as
seen in Figure 7.7. In fact, your intuition is reliable in predicting many of the factors that are involved. For example, we know that
a door opens slowly if we push too close to its hinges. Furthermore, we know that the more massive the door, the more slowly it
opens. The first example implies that the farther the force is applied from the pivot, the greater the angular acceleration; another
implication is that angular acceleration is inversely proportional to mass. These relationships should seem very similar to the
familiar relationships among force, mass, and acceleration embodied in Newton’s second law of motion. There are, in fact,
precise rotational analogs to both force and mass.
Figure 7.7 Force is required to spin the bike wheel. The greater the force, the greater the angular acceleration produced. The more massive the wheel,
the smaller the angular acceleration. If you push on a spoke closer to the axle, the angular acceleration will be smaller.
To develop the precise relationship among force, mass, radius, and angular acceleration, consider what happens if we exert a
force F on a point mass m that is at a distance r from a pivot point, as shown in Figure 7.8. Because the force is
perpendicular to r , an acceleration a = F
m is obtained in the direction of F . We can rearrange this equation such that
F = ma and then look for ways to relate this expression to expressions for rotational quantities. We note that a = rα , and we
substitute this expression into F = ma , yielding
(7.15)F = mrα.
The turning effectiveness of force is called torque. Intuitively, torque increases with a larger lever arm, or the perpendicular
distance between the center of rotation and the point at which force is being applied (think of a see-saw; to balance the weight of
a heavier child on one side with a lighter child on the other side, the lighter child needs to sit farther from the pivot point). So,
torque is given by τ = rF . So, if we multiply both sides of the equation above by r , we get torque on the left-hand side. That
is,
(7.16)rF = mr2α
or
(7.17)τ = mr2α.
This last equation is the rotational analog of Newton’s second law ( F = ma ), where torque is analogous to force, angular
176 Chapter 7 | Rotation
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12