Figure 6.9 Amplitude of a harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the driving force. The curves represent the same oscillator with the
same natural frequency but with different amounts of damping. Resonance occurs when the driving frequency equals the natural frequency, and the
greatest response is for the least amount of damping. The narrowest response is also for the least damping.
It is interesting that the widths of the resonance curves shown in Figure 6.9 depend on damping: the less the damping, the
narrower the resonance. The message is that if you want a driven oscillator to resonate at a very specific frequency, you need as
little damping as possible. Little damping is the case for piano strings and many other musical instruments. Conversely, if you
want small-amplitude oscillations, such as in a car’s suspension system, then you want heavy damping. Heavy damping reduces
the amplitude, but the tradeoff is that the system responds at more frequencies.
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply to a huge variety of systems. When you tune a radio, for example, you are
adjusting its resonant frequency so that it only oscillates to the desired station’s broadcast (driving) frequency. The more
selective the radio is in discriminating between stations, the smaller its damping. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely
used medical diagnostic tool in which atomic nuclei (mostly hydrogen nuclei) are made to resonate by incoming radio waves (on
the order of 100 MHz). A child on a swing is driven by a parent at the swing’s natural frequency to achieve maximum amplitude.
In all of these cases, the efficiency of energy transfer from the driving force into the oscillator is best at resonance. Speed bumps
and gravel roads prove that even a car’s suspension system is not immune to resonance. In spite of finely engineered shock
absorbers, which ordinarily convert mechanical energy to thermal energy almost as fast as it comes in, speed bumps still cause
a large-amplitude oscillation. On gravel roads that are corrugated, you may have noticed that if you travel at the “wrong” speed,
the bumps are very noticeable whereas at other speeds you may hardly feel the bumps at all. Figure 6.10 shows a photograph
of a famous example (the Tacoma Narrows Bridge) of the destructive effects of a driven harmonic oscillation. The Millennium
Bridge in London was closed for a short period of time for the same reason while inspections were carried out.
In our bodies, the chest cavity is a clear example of a system at resonance. The diaphragm and chest wall drive the oscillations
of the chest cavity which result in the lungs inflating and deflating. The system is critically damped and the muscular diaphragm
oscillates at the resonant value for the system, making it highly efficient.
Figure 6.10 In 1940, the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington state collapsed. Heavy cross winds drove the bridge into oscillations at its resonant
frequency. Damping decreased when support cables broke loose and started to slip over the towers, allowing increasingly greater amplitudes until the
structure failed (credit: PRI's Studio 360, via Flickr)
Check Your Understanding
A famous magic trick involves a performer singing a note toward a crystal glass until the glass shatters. Explain why the trick
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 151