6.7 Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength
Figure 6.29 When a firework explodes, the light energy is perceived before the sound energy. Sound travels more slowly than light does. (credit:
Dominic Alves, Flickr)
Sound, like all waves, travels at a certain speed and has the properties of frequency and wavelength. You can observe direct
evidence of the speed of sound while watching a fireworks display. The flash of an explosion is seen well before its sound is
heard, implying both that sound travels at a finite speed and that it is much slower than light. You can also directly sense the
frequency of a sound. Perception of frequency is called pitch. The wavelength of sound is not directly sensed, but indirect
evidence is found in the correlation of the size of musical instruments with their pitch. Small instruments, such as a piccolo,
typically make high-pitch sounds, while large instruments, such as a tuba, typically make low-pitch sounds. High pitch means
small wavelength, and the size of a musical instrument is directly related to the wavelengths of sound it produces. So a small
instrument creates short-wavelength sounds. Similar arguments hold that a large instrument creates long-wavelength sounds.
The relationship of the speed of sound, its frequency, and wavelength is the same as for all waves:
(6.17)vw = fλ,
where vw is the speed of sound, f is its frequency, and λ is its wavelength. The wavelength of a sound is the distance
between adjacent identical parts of a wave—for example, between adjacent compressions as illustrated in Figure 6.30. The
frequency is the same as that of the source and is the number of waves that pass a point per unit time.
Figure 6.30 A sound wave emanates from a source vibrating at a frequency f , propagates at vw , and has a wavelength λ .
Table 6.1 makes it apparent that the speed of sound varies greatly in different media. The speed of sound in a medium is
determined by a combination of the medium’s rigidity (or compressibility in gases) and its density. The more rigid (or less
compressible) the medium, the faster the speed of sound. This observation is analogous to the fact that the frequency of a
simple harmonic motion is directly proportional to the stiffness of the oscillating object. The greater the density of a medium, the
slower the speed of sound. This observation is analogous to the fact that the frequency of a simple harmonic motion is inversely
proportional to the mass of the oscillating object. The speed of sound in air is low, because air is compressible. Because liquids
and solids are relatively rigid and very difficult to compress, the speed of sound in such media is generally greater than in gases.
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 161