(7.9)Δt = Δω
α .
Solution for (b)
Here the angular velocity decreases from 26.2 rad/s (250 rpm) to zero, so that Δω is – 26.2 rad/s , and α is given to
be – 87.3 rad/s2 . Thus,
(7.10)Δt = – 26.2 rad/s
– 87.3 rad/s2
= 0.300 s.
Discussion
Note that the angular acceleration as the girl spins the wheel is small and positive; it takes 5 s to produce an appreciable
angular velocity. When she hits the brake, the angular acceleration is large and negative. The angular velocity quickly goes
to zero. In both cases, the relationships are analogous to what happens with linear motion. For example, there is a large
deceleration when you crash into a brick wall—the velocity change is large in a short time interval.
If the bicycle in the preceding example had been on its wheels instead of upside-down, it would first have accelerated along the
ground and then come to a stop. This connection between circular motion and linear motion needs to be explored. For example,
it would be useful to know how linear and angular acceleration are related. In circular motion, linear acceleration is tangent to the
circle at the point of interest, as seen in Figure 7.4. Thus, linear acceleration is called tangential acceleration at . This is not to
be confused with centripetal acceleration we covered earlier (see: Figure 7.5).
Figure 7.4 In circular motion, linear acceleration a , occurs as the magnitude of the velocity changes: a is tangent to the motion. In the context of
circular motion, linear acceleration is also called tangential acceleration at .
Figure 7.5 Centripetal acceleration ac occurs as the direction of velocity changes; it is perpendicular to the circular motion. Centripetal and tangential
acceleration are thus perpendicular to each other.
This tangential acceleration at is related to angular acceleration α in a similar way as how linear velocity is related to angular
velocity. So, taking the cues from Equation 7.3 and Equation 7.4, tangential acceleration and angular acceleration are related
by,
(7.11)at = rα,
174 Chapter 7 | Rotation
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12