Figure 7.17 Figure (a) shows a disk is rotating counterclockwise when viewed from above. Figure (b) shows the right-hand rule. The direction of
angular velocity ω size and angular momentum L are defined to be the direction in which the thumb of your right hand points when you curl your
fingers in the direction of the disk’s rotation as shown.
Now, recall that torque changes angular momentum as expressed by
(7.63)net τ = ΔL
Δt .
This equation means that the direction of ΔL is the same as the direction of the torque τ that creates it. This result is
illustrated in Figure 7.18, which shows the direction of torque and the angular momentum it creates.
Let us now consider a bicycle wheel with a couple of handles attached to it, as shown in Figure 7.19. (This device is popular in
demonstrations among physicists, because it does unexpected things.) With the wheel rotating as shown, its angular momentum
is to the woman's left. Suppose the person holding the wheel tries to rotate it as in the figure. Her natural expectation is that the
wheel will rotate in the direction she pushes it—but what happens is quite different. The forces exerted create a torque that is
horizontal toward the person, as shown in Figure 7.19(a). This torque creates a change in angular momentum L in the same
direction, perpendicular to the original angular momentum L , thus changing the direction of L but not the magnitude of L .
Figure 7.19 shows how ΔL and L add, giving a new angular momentum with direction that is inclined more toward the person
than before. The axis of the wheel has thus moved perpendicular to the forces exerted on it, instead of in the expected direction.
Figure 7.18 In figure (a), the torque is perpendicular to the plane formed by r and F and is the direction your right thumb would point to if you curled
your fingers in the direction of F . Figure (b) shows that the direction of the torque is the same as that of the angular momentum it produces.
188 Chapter 7 | Rotation
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12