(6.15)vw = 10.0 m
5.00 s .
2. Solve for vw to find vw = 2.00 m/s.
Discussion
This slow speed seems reasonable for an ocean wave. Note that the wave moves to the right in the figure at this speed, not
the varying speed at which the sea gull moves up and down.
Transverse and Longitudinal Waves
A simple wave consists of a periodic disturbance that propagates from one place to another. The wave in Figure 6.13
propagates in the horizontal direction while the surface is disturbed in the vertical direction. Such a wave is called a transverse
wave or shear wave; in such a wave, the disturbance is perpendicular to the direction of propagation. In contrast, in a
longitudinal wave or compressional wave, the disturbance is parallel to the direction of propagation. Figure 6.14 shows an
example of a longitudinal wave. The size of the disturbance is its amplitude X and is completely independent of the speed of
propagation vw .
Figure 6.13 In this example of a transverse wave, the wave propagates horizontally, and the disturbance in the cord is in the vertical direction.
Figure 6.14 In this example of a longitudinal wave, the wave propagates horizontally, and the disturbance in the cord is also in the horizontal direction.
Waves may be transverse, longitudinal, or a combination of the two. (Water waves are actually a combination of transverse and
longitudinal. The simplified water wave illustrated in Figure 6.12 shows no longitudinal motion of the bird.) The waves on the
strings of musical instruments are transverse—so are electromagnetic waves, such as visible light.
Sound waves in air and water are longitudinal. Their disturbances are periodic variations in pressure that are transmitted in
fluids. Fluids do not have appreciable shear strength, and thus the sound waves in them must be longitudinal or compressional.
Sound in solids can be both longitudinal and transverse.
Figure 6.15 The wave on a guitar string is transverse. The sound wave rattles a sheet of paper in a direction that shows the sound wave is
longitudinal.
154 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12