Figure 6.12 An idealized ocean wave passes under a sea gull that bobs up and down in simple harmonic motion. The wave has a wavelength λ ,
which is the distance between adjacent identical parts of the wave. The up and down disturbance of the surface propagates parallel to the surface at a
speed vw .
The water wave in the figure also has a length associated with it, called its wavelength λ , the distance between adjacent
identical parts of a wave. ( λ is the distance parallel to the direction of propagation.) The speed of propagation vw is the
distance the wave travels in a given time, which is one wavelength in the time of one period. In equation form, that is
(6.13)vw = λ
T
or
(6.14)vw = fλ.
This fundamental relationship holds for all types of waves. For water waves, vw is the speed of a surface wave; for sound, vw
is the speed of sound; and for visible light, vw is the speed of light, for example.
One note of caution with Equation 6.14: despite the appearance, wave speed vw is a not a function of frequency f and
wavelength λ . When f changes (or λ changes), vw does not change (you will see this explicitly later with sound and light
waves). Wave speed is a property of the medium the wave travels in. Unless the medium itself changes, the wave speed
remains constant. This is true of sound and light waves, as well as almost all other types of waves you will see in this textbook
(water waves, waves on a string, etc.). So, what happens when frequency or wavelength does change, then? The wavelength of
frequency changes to compensate. For example, if the frequency doubles for a given wave, instead of the wave speed doubling,
the wavelength will decrease to half, so that the product f λ remains constant.
Take-Home Experiment: Waves in a Bowl
Fill a large bowl or basin with water and wait for the water to settle so there are no ripples. Gently drop a cork into the middle
of the bowl. Estimate the wavelength and period of oscillation of the water wave that propagates away from the cork.
Remove the cork from the bowl and wait for the water to settle again. Gently drop the cork at a height that is different from
the first drop. Does the wavelength depend upon how high above the water the cork is dropped?
Example 6.3 Calculate the Velocity of Wave Propagation: Gull in the Ocean
Calculate the wave velocity of the ocean wave in Figure 6.12 if the distance between wave crests is 10.0 m and the time for
a sea gull to bob up and down is 5.00 s.
Strategy
We are asked to find vw . The given information tells us that λ = 10.0 m and T = 5.00 s . Therefore, we can use
vw = λ
T to find the wave velocity.
Solution
1. Enter the known values into vw = λ
T :
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 153