Figure 7.19 In figure (a), a person holding the spinning bike wheel lifts it with her right hand and pushes down with her left hand in an attempt to rotate
the wheel. This action creates a torque directly toward her. This torque causes a change in angular momentum ΔL in exactly the same direction.
Figure (b) shows a vector diagram depicting how ΔL and L add, producing a new angular momentum pointing more toward the person. The wheel
moves toward the person, perpendicular to the forces she exerts on it.
This same logic explains the behavior of gyroscopes. Figure 7.20 shows the two forces acting on a spinning gyroscope. The
torque produced is perpendicular to the angular momentum, thus the direction of the angular momentum is changed but not its
magnitude, as a result of the change in angular momentum produced by the torque. This type of motion is called a precession,
and we say that the gyroscope precesses around a vertical axis, since the torque is always horizontal and perpendicular to L . If
the gyroscope is not spinning, it acquires initial angular momentum in the direction of the torque ( L = ΔL ) and the change of
angular momentum due to torque continues to add in the same direction, causing the gyroscope to rotate around a horizontal
axis, falling over just as we would expect.
Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope. Its angular momentum is along its axis and points at Polaris, the North Star. But Earth
is slowly precessing (once in about 26,000 years) due to the torque of the Sun and the Moon on its nonspherical shape.
Figure 7.20 As seen in figure (a), the forces on a spinning gyroscope are its weight and the supporting force from the stand. These forces create a
horizontal torque on the gyroscope, which create a change in angular momentum ΔL that is also horizontal. In figure (b), ΔL and L add to
produce a new angular momentum with the same magnitude, but different direction, so that the gyroscope precesses in the direction shown instead of
falling over.
Chapter 7 | Rotation 189