amplitude:
antinode:
audible range:
beat frequency:
bow wake:
constructive interference:
damping force:
destructive interference:
Doppler shift:
Figure 6.39 The blue glow in this research reactor pool is Cherenkov radiation caused by subatomic particles traveling faster than the speed of light in
water. (credit: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission)
Doppler shifts and sonic booms are interesting sound phenomena that occur in all types of waves. They can be of considerable
use. For example, the Doppler shift in ultrasound can be used to measure blood velocity, while police use the Doppler shift in
radar (a microwave) to measure car velocities. In meteorology, the Doppler shift is used to track the motion of storm clouds; such
“Doppler Radar” can give velocity and direction and rain or snow potential of imposing weather fronts. In astronomy, we can
examine the light emitted from distant galaxies and determine their speed relative to ours. As galaxies move away from us, their
light is shifted to a lower frequency, and so to a longer wavelength—the so-called red shift. Such information from galaxies far, far
away has allowed us to estimate the age of the universe (from the Big Bang) as about 14 billion years.
Check Your Understanding
Why did scientist Christian Doppler observe musicians both on a moving train and also from a stationary point not on the
train?
Solution
Doppler needed to compare the perception of sound when the observer is stationary and the sound source moves, as well
as when the sound source and the observer are both in motion.
Check Your Understanding
Describe a situation in your life when you might rely on the Doppler shift to help you either while driving a car or walking near
traffic.
Solution
If I am driving and I hear Doppler shift in an ambulance siren, I would be able to tell when it was getting closer and also if it
has passed by. This would help me to know whether I needed to pull over and let the ambulance through.
Glossary
the maximum displacement from the equilibrium position of an object oscillating around the equilibrium position
the location of maximum amplitude in standing waves
frequencies between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz
the frequency of the amplitude fluctuations of a wave
V-shaped disturbance created when the wave source moves faster than the wave propagation speed
when two waves arrive at the same point exactly in phase; that is, the crests of the two waves are
precisely aligned, as are the troughs
a frictional force which converts the mechanical energy of the oscillatory motion into thermal energy
when two identical waves arrive at the same point exactly out of phase; that is, precisely aligned
crest to trough
the change in wave frequency due to relative motion of source and observer
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 167