Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Voice as a Sound Wave
Suspend a sheet of paper so that the top edge of the paper is fixed and the bottom edge is free to move. You could tape the
top edge of the paper to the edge of a table. Gently blow near the edge of the bottom of the sheet and note how the sheet
moves. Speak softly and then louder such that the sounds hit the edge of the bottom of the paper, and note how the sheet
moves. Explain the effects.
Check Your Understanding
Imagine you observe two fireworks explode. You hear the explosion of one as soon as you see it. However, you see the
other firework for several milliseconds before you hear the explosion. Explain why this is so.
Solution
Sound and light both travel at definite speeds. The speed of sound is slower than the speed of light. The first firework is
probably very close by, so the speed difference is not noticeable. The second firework is farther away, so the light arrives at
your eyes noticeably sooner than the sound wave arrives at your ears.
Check Your Understanding
You observe two musical instruments that you cannot identify. One plays high-pitch sounds and the other plays low-pitch
sounds. How could you determine which is which without hearing either of them play?
Solution
Compare their sizes. High-pitch instruments are generally smaller than low-pitch instruments because they generate a
smaller wavelength.
6.8 Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
The characteristic sound of a motorcycle buzzing by is an example of the Doppler effect. The high-pitch scream shifts
dramatically to a lower-pitch roar as the motorcycle passes by a stationary observer. The closer the motorcycle brushes by, the
more abrupt the shift. The faster the motorcycle moves, the greater the shift. We also hear this characteristic shift in frequency
for passing race cars, airplanes, and trains. It is so familiar that it is used to imply motion and children often mimic it in play.
The Doppler effect is an alteration in the observed frequency of a sound due to motion of either the source or the observer.
Although less familiar, this effect is easily noticed for a stationary source and moving observer. For example, if you ride a train
past a stationary warning bell, you will hear the bell’s frequency shift from high to low as you pass by. This change in frequency
due to relative motion of source and observer is called a Doppler shift. The Doppler effect is named for the Austrian physicist
and mathematician Christian Johann Doppler (1803–1853), who did experiments with both moving sources and moving
observers. Doppler, for example, had musicians play on a moving open train car and also play standing next to the train tracks as
a train passed by. Their music was observed both on and off the train, and changes in frequency were measured.
What causes the Doppler shift? Figure 6.33, Figure 6.34, and Figure 6.35 compare sound waves emitted by stationary and
moving sources in a stationary air mass. Each disturbance spreads out spherically from the point where the sound was emitted.
If the source is stationary, then all of the spheres representing the air compressions in the sound wave centered on the same
point, and the stationary observers on either side see the same wavelength and frequency as emitted by the source, as in Figure
6.33. If the source is moving, as in Figure 6.34, then the situation is different. Each compression of the air moves out in a sphere
from the point where it was emitted, but the point of emission moves. This moving emission point causes the air compressions to
be closer together on one side and farther apart on the other. Thus, the wavelength is shorter in the direction the source is
moving (on the right in Figure 6.34), and longer in the opposite direction (on the left in Figure 6.34). Finally, if the observers
move, as in Figure 6.35, the frequency at which they receive the compressions changes. The observer moving toward the
source receives them at a higher frequency, and the person moving away from the source receives them at a lower frequency.
Figure 6.33 Sounds emitted by a source spread out in spherical waves. Because the source, observers, and air are stationary, the wavelength and
frequency are the same in all directions and to all observers.
164 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12