1. Substitute 0.400 μs for T in f = 1
T :
(6.3)f = 1
T = 1
0.400×10−6 s
.
Solve to find
(6.4)f = 2.50×106 Hz.
Discussion a
The frequency of sound found in (a) is much higher than the highest frequency that humans can hear and, therefore, is
called ultrasound. Appropriate oscillations at this frequency generate ultrasound used for noninvasive medical diagnoses,
such as observations of a fetus in the womb.
Solution b
1. Identify the known values:
The time for one complete oscillation is the period T :
(6.5)f = 1
T .
2. Solve for T :
(6.6)T = 1
f .
3. Substitute the given value for the frequency into the resulting expression:
(6.7)T = 1
f = 1
264 Hz = 1
264 cycles/s = 3.79×10−3 s = 3.79 ms.
Discussion
The period found in (b) is the time per cycle, but this value is often quoted as simply the time in convenient units (ms or
milliseconds in this case).
Check your Understanding
Identify an event in your life (such as receiving a paycheck) that occurs regularly. Identify both the period and frequency of
this event.
Solution
I visit my parents for dinner every other Sunday. The frequency of my visits is 26 per calendar year. The period is two weeks.
Conceptual Questions
Exercise 6.1
If an oscillation occurs more rapidly, how does the period of oscillation change? How does the frequency change?
Exercise 6.2
Give examples of natural phenomena that occur with constant frequency (or period) over a length of time.
6.2 Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion
The oscillations of a system in which the net force can be described by Hooke’s law are of special importance, because they are
very common. They are also the simplest oscillatory systems. Simple Harmonic Motion (SHM) is the name given to oscillatory
motion for a system where the net force can be described by Hooke’s law, and such a system is called a simple harmonic
oscillator. If the net force can be described by Hooke’s law and there is no damping (by friction or other non-conservative
forces), then a simple harmonic oscillator will oscillate with equal displacement on either side of the equilibrium position, as
shown for an object on a spring in Figure 6.3. The maximum displacement from equilibrium is called the amplitude X . The
units for amplitude and displacement are the same, but depend on the type of oscillation. For the object on the spring, the units
of amplitude and displacement are meters; whereas for sound oscillations, they have units of pressure (and other types of
oscillations have yet other units). Because amplitude is the maximum displacement, it is related to the energy in the oscillation.
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 145