Figure 6.18 Pure destructive interference of two identical waves produces zero amplitude, or complete cancellation.
While pure constructive and pure destructive interference do occur, they require precisely aligned identical waves. The
superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference and can vary from place to
place and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for example, can be loud in one spot and quiet in another. Varying loudness means
the sound waves add partially constructively and partially destructively at different locations. A stereo has at least two speakers
creating sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. All these waves superimpose. An example of sounds that vary over
time from constructive to destructive is found in the combined whine of airplane jets heard by a stationary passenger. The
combined sound can fluctuate up and down in volume as the sound from the two engines varies in time from constructive to
destructive. These examples are of waves that are similar.
An example of the superposition of two dissimilar waves is shown in Figure 6.19. Here again, the disturbances add and subtract,
producing a more complicated looking wave.
Figure 6.19 Superposition of non-identical waves exhibits both constructive and destructive interference.
Standing Waves
Sometimes waves do not seem to move; rather, they just vibrate in place. Unmoving waves can be seen on the surface of a
glass of milk in a refrigerator, for example. Vibrations from the refrigerator motor create waves on the milk that oscillate up and
down but do not seem to move across the surface. These waves are formed by the superposition of two or more moving waves,
such as illustrated in Figure 6.20 for two identical waves moving in opposite directions. The waves move through each other with
their disturbances adding as they go by. If the two waves have the same amplitude and wavelength, then they alternate between
constructive and destructive interference. The resultant looks like a wave standing in place and, thus, is called a standing wave.
Waves on the glass of milk are one example of standing waves. There are other standing waves, such as on guitar strings and in
organ pipes. With the glass of milk, the two waves that produce standing waves may come from reflections from the side of the
glass.
A closer look at earthquakes provides evidence for conditions appropriate for resonance, standing waves, and constructive and
destructive interference. A building may be vibrated for several seconds with a driving frequency matching that of the natural
frequency of vibration of the building—producing a resonance resulting in one building collapsing while neighboring buildings do
not. Often buildings of a certain height are devastated while other taller buildings remain intact. The building height matches the
condition for setting up a standing wave for that particular height. As the earthquake waves travel along the surface of Earth and
reflect off denser rocks, constructive interference occurs at certain points. Often areas closer to the epicenter are not damaged
while areas farther away are damaged.
156 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12