Figure 6.22 First and second harmonic frequencies are shown.
Beats
Striking two adjacent keys on a piano produces a warbling combination usually considered to be unpleasant. The superposition
of two waves of similar but not identical frequencies is the culprit. Another example is often noticeable in jet aircraft, particularly
the two-engine variety, while taxiing. The combined sound of the engines goes up and down in loudness. This varying loudness
happens because the sound waves have similar but not identical frequencies. The discordant warbling of the piano and the
fluctuating loudness of the jet engine noise are both due to alternately constructive and destructive interference as the two waves
go in and out of phase. Figure 6.23 illustrates this graphically.
Figure 6.23 Beats are produced by the superposition of two waves of slightly different frequencies but identical amplitudes. The waves alternate in time
between constructive interference and destructive interference, giving the resulting wave a time-varying amplitude.
The wave resulting from the superposition of two similar-frequency waves has a frequency that is the average of the two. This
wave fluctuates in amplitude, or beats, with a frequency called the beat frequency. We can determine the beat frequency by
adding two waves together mathematically. The result,
(6.16)fB = ∣ f1 − f2 ∣
is the beat frequency. The resultant wave has the average frequency of the two superimposed waves, but it also fluctuates in
overall amplitude at the beat frequency fB . This result is valid for all types of waves. However, if it is a sound wave, providing
the two frequencies are similar, then what we hear is an average frequency that gets louder and softer (or warbles) at the beat
frequency.
Making Career Connections
Piano tuners use beats routinely in their work. When comparing a note with a tuning fork, they listen for beats and adjust the
string until the beats go away (to zero frequency). For example, if the tuning fork has a 256 Hz frequency and two beats
per second are heard, then the other frequency is either 254 or 258 Hz . Most keys hit multiple strings, and these strings
are actually adjusted until they have nearly the same frequency and give a slow beat for richness. Twelve-string guitars and
mandolins are also tuned using beats.
While beats may sometimes be annoying in audible sounds, we will find that beats have many applications. Observing beats is a
very useful way to compare similar frequencies. There are applications of beats as apparently disparate as in ultrasonic imaging
and radar speed traps.
Check Your Understanding
Imagine you are holding one end of a jump rope, and your friend holds the other. If your friend holds her end still, you can
move your end up and down, creating a transverse wave. If your friend then begins to move her end up and down,
generating a wave in the opposite direction, what resultant wave forms would you expect to see in the jump rope?
Solution
The rope would alternate between having waves with amplitudes two times the original amplitude and reaching equilibrium
158 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12