Take-Home Experiment: SHM and the Marble
Find a bowl or basin that is shaped like a hemisphere on the inside. Place a marble inside the bowl and tilt the bowl
periodically so the marble rolls from the bottom of the bowl to equally high points on the sides of the bowl. Get a feel for the
force required to maintain this periodic motion. What is the restoring force and what role does the force you apply play in the
simple harmonic motion (SHM) of the marble?
Figure 6.3 An object attached to a spring sliding on a frictionless surface is an uncomplicated simple harmonic oscillator. When displaced from
equilibrium, the object performs simple harmonic motion that has an amplitude X and a period T . The object’s maximum speed occurs as it passes
through equilibrium. The stiffer the spring is, the smaller the period T . The greater the mass of the object is, the greater the period T .
What is so significant about simple harmonic motion? One special thing is that the period T and frequency f of a simple
harmonic oscillator are independent of amplitude. The string of a guitar, for example, will oscillate with the same frequency
whether plucked gently or hard. Because the period is constant, a simple harmonic oscillator can be used as a clock.
Two important factors do affect the period of a simple harmonic oscillator. The period is related to how stiff the system is. A very
stiff object has a large spring constant k , which causes the system to have a smaller period. For example, you can adjust a
diving board’s stiffness—the stiffer it is, the faster it vibrates, and the shorter its period. Period also depends on the mass of the
oscillating system. The more massive the system is, the longer the period. For example, a heavy person on a diving board
bounces up and down more slowly than a light one.
In fact, the mass m and the spring constant k are the only factors that affect the period and frequency of simple harmonic
motion of a mass on a spring.
Period of Simple Harmonic Oscillator
The period of a simple harmonic oscillator is given by
(6.8)T = 2π m
k
and, because f = 1 / T , the frequency of a simple harmonic oscillator is
(6.9)f = 1
2π
k
m.
Note that neither T nor f has any dependence on amplitude.
Take-Home Experiment: Mass and Ruler Oscillations
Find two identical wooden or plastic rulers. Tape one end of each ruler firmly to the edge of a table so that the length of each
146 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12