Earthquake waves under Earth’s surface also have both longitudinal and transverse components (called compressional or P-
waves and shear or S-waves, respectively). These components have important individual characteristics—they propagate at
different speeds, for example. Earthquakes also have surface waves that are similar to surface waves on water.
Check Your Understanding
Why is it important to differentiate between longitudinal and transverse waves?
Solution
In the different types of waves, energy can propagate in a different direction relative to the motion of the wave. This is
important to understand how different types of waves affect the materials around them.
6.5 Wave Interference: Standing Waves and Beats
Figure 6.16 These waves result from the superposition of several waves from different sources, producing a complex pattern. (credit: waterborough,
Wikimedia Commons)
Most waves do not look very simple. They look more like the waves in Figure 6.16 than like the simple water wave considered in
"Waves". (Simple waves may be created by a simple harmonic oscillation, and thus have a sinusoidal shape). Complex waves
are more interesting, even beautiful, but they look formidable. Most waves appear complex because they result from several
simple waves adding together. Luckily, the rules for adding waves are quite simple.
When two or more waves arrive at the same point, they superimpose themselves on one another. More specifically, the
disturbances of waves are superimposed when they come together—a phenomenon called superposition. Each disturbance
corresponds to a force, and forces add. If the disturbances are along the same line, then the resulting wave is a simple addition
of the disturbances of the individual waves—that is, their amplitudes add. Figure 6.17 and Figure 6.18 illustrate superposition in
two special cases, both of which produce simple results.
Figure 6.17 shows two identical waves that arrive at the same point exactly in phase. The crests of the two waves are precisely
aligned, as are the troughs. This superposition produces pure constructive interference. Because the disturbances add, pure
constructive interference produces a wave that has twice the amplitude of the individual waves, but has the same wavelength.
Figure 6.18 shows two identical waves that arrive exactly out of phase—that is, precisely aligned crest to trough—producing
pure destructive interference. Because the disturbances are in the opposite direction for this superposition, the resulting
amplitude is zero for pure destructive interference—the waves completely cancel.
Figure 6.17 Pure constructive interference of two identical waves produces one with twice the amplitude, but the same wavelength.
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 155