Figure 6.36 Sound waves from a source that moves faster than the speed of sound spread spherically from the point where they are emitted, but the
source moves ahead of each. Constructive interference along the lines shown (actually a cone in three dimensions) creates a shock wave called a
sonic boom. The faster the speed of the source, the smaller the angle θ .
There is constructive interference along the lines shown (a cone in three dimensions) from similar sound waves arriving there
simultaneously. This superposition forms a disturbance called a sonic boom, a constructive interference of sound created by an
object moving faster than sound. Inside the cone, the interference is mostly destructive, and so the sound intensity there is much
less than on the shock wave. An aircraft creates two sonic booms, one from its nose and one from its tail. (See Figure 6.37.)
During television coverage of space shuttle landings, two distinct booms could often be heard. These were separated by exactly
the time it would take the shuttle to pass by a point. Observers on the ground often do not see the aircraft creating the sonic
boom, because it has passed by before the shock wave reaches them, as seen in Figure 6.37. If the aircraft flies close by at low
altitude, pressures in the sonic boom can be destructive and break windows as well as rattle nerves. Because of how destructive
sonic booms can be, supersonic flights are banned over populated areas of the United States.
Figure 6.37 Two sonic booms, created by the nose and tail of an aircraft, are observed on the ground after the plane has passed by.
Sonic booms are one example of a broader phenomenon called bow wakes. A bow wake, such as the one in Figure 6.38, is
created when the wave source moves faster than the wave propagation speed. Water waves spread out in circles from the point
where created, and the bow wake is the familiar V-shaped wake trailing the source. A more exotic bow wake is created when a
subatomic particle travels through a medium faster than the speed of light travels in that medium (the speed of light in vacuum is
c = 2.998×108 m/s , and this is the maximum speed anything can move, but in water, for example, speed of light slows to
0.75c , and other particles can move faster). If the particle creates light in its passage, that light spreads on a cone with an angle
indicative of the speed of the particle, as illustrated in Figure 6.39. Such a bow wake is called Cherenkov radiation and is
commonly observed in particle physics.
Figure 6.38 Bow wake created by a duck. Constructive interference produces the rather structured wake, while there is relatively little wave action
inside the wake, where interference is mostly destructive. (credit: Horia Varlan, Flickr)
166 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12