with no amplitude at all. The wavelengths will result in both constructive and destructive interference
Check Your Understanding
Define nodes and antinodes.
Solution
Nodes are areas of wave interference where there is no motion. Antinodes are areas of wave interference where the motion
is at its maximum point.
Check Your Understanding
You hook up a stereo system. When you test the system, you notice that in one corner of the room, the sounds seem dull. In
another area, the sounds seem excessively loud. Describe how the sound moving about the room could result in these
effects.
Solution
With multiple speakers putting out sounds into the room, and these sounds bouncing off walls, there is bound to be some
wave interference. In the dull areas, the interference is probably mostly destructive. In the louder areas, the interference is
probably mostly constructive.
6.6 Sound
Figure 6.24 This glass has been shattered by a high-intensity sound wave of the same frequency as the resonant frequency of the glass. While the
sound is not visible, the effects of the sound prove its existence. (credit: ||read||, Flickr)
Sound can be used as a familiar illustration of waves. Because hearing is one of our most important senses, it is interesting to
see how the physical properties of sound correspond to our perceptions of it. Hearing is the perception of sound, just as vision is
the perception of visible light. But sound has important applications beyond hearing. Ultrasound, for example, is not heard but
can be employed to form medical images and is also used in treatment.
The physical phenomenon of sound is defined to be a disturbance of matter that is transmitted from its source outward. Sound is
a wave. On the atomic scale, it is a disturbance of atoms that is far more ordered than their thermal motions. In many instances,
sound is a periodic wave, and the atoms undergo simple harmonic motion. In this text, we shall explore such periodic sound
waves.
A vibrating string produces a sound wave as illustrated in Figure 6.25, Figure 6.26, and Figure 6.27. As the string oscillates
back and forth, it transfers energy to the air, mostly as thermal energy created by turbulence. But a small part of the string’s
energy goes into compressing and expanding the surrounding air, creating slightly higher and lower local pressures. These
compressions (high pressure regions) and rarefactions (low pressure regions) move out as longitudinal pressure waves having
the same frequency as the string—they are the disturbance that is a sound wave. (Sound waves in air and most fluids are
longitudinal, because fluids have almost no shear strength. In solids, sound waves can be both transverse and longitudinal.)
Figure 6.27 shows a graph of gauge pressure versus distance from the vibrating string.
Figure 6.25 A vibrating string moving to the right compresses the air in front of it and expands the air behind it.
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 159