Figure 6.26 As the string moves to the left, it creates another compression and rarefaction as the ones on the right move away from the string.
Figure 6.27 After many vibrations, there are a series of compressions and rarefactions moving out from the string as a sound wave. The graph shows
gauge pressure versus distance from the source. Pressures vary only slightly from atmospheric for ordinary sounds.
The amplitude of a sound wave decreases with distance from its source, because the energy of the wave is spread over a larger
and larger area. But it is also absorbed by objects, such as the eardrum in Figure 6.28, and converted to thermal energy by the
viscosity of air. In addition, during each compression a little heat transfers to the air and during each rarefaction even less heat
transfers from the air, so that the heat transfer reduces the organized disturbance into random thermal motions. Whether the
heat transfer from compression to rarefaction is significant depends on how far apart they are—that is, it depends on wavelength.
Wavelength, frequency, amplitude, and speed of propagation are important for sound, as they are for all waves.
When the frequency of the sound wave is in audible range of 20 to 20,000 Hz, the vibration of the eardrums at these
frequencies can be sensed, which is what we hear. Sound waves of frequency above 20 kHz are called ultrasound waves.
Some construction equipment produces infrasound waves of frequencies less than 20 Hz, which, although they can't be heard,
can still affect the human body at large enough amplitudes.
Figure 6.28 Sound wave compressions and rarefactions travel up the ear canal and force the eardrum to vibrate. There is a net force on the eardrum,
since the sound wave pressures differ from the atmospheric pressure found behind the eardrum. A complicated mechanism converts the vibrations to
nerve impulses, which are perceived by the person.
160 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12