Introduction to Oscillatory Motion and Waves
What do an ocean buoy, a child in a swing, the cone inside a speaker, a guitar, atoms in a crystal, the motion of chest cavities,
and the beating of hearts all have in common? They all oscillate—-that is, they move back and forth between two points. Many
systems oscillate, and they have certain characteristics in common. All oscillations involve force and energy. You push a child in
a swing to get the motion started. The energy of atoms vibrating in a crystal can be increased with heat. You put energy into a
guitar string when you pluck it.
Some oscillations create waves. A guitar creates sound waves. You can make water waves in a swimming pool by slapping the
water with your hand. You can no doubt think of other types of waves. Some, such as water waves, are visible. Some, such as
sound waves, are not. But every wave is a disturbance that moves from its source and carries energy. Other examples of waves
include earthquakes and visible light. Even subatomic particles, such as electrons, can behave like waves.
By studying oscillatory motion and waves, we shall find that a small number of underlying principles describe all of them and that
wave phenomena are more common than you have ever imagined.
6.1 Period and Frequency in Oscillations
Figure 6.2 The strings on this guitar vibrate at regular time intervals. (credit: JAR)
When you pluck a guitar string, the resulting sound has a steady tone and lasts a long time. Each successive vibration of the
string takes the same time as the previous one. We define periodic motion to be a motion that repeats itself at regular time
intervals, such as exhibited by the guitar string or by an object on a spring moving up and down. The time to complete one
oscillation remains constant and is called the period T . Its units are usually seconds, but may be any convenient unit of time.
The word period refers to the time for some event whether repetitive or not; but we shall be primarily interested in periodic
motion, which is by definition repetitive. A concept closely related to period is the frequency of an event. For example, if you get a
paycheck twice a month, the frequency of payment is two per month and the period between checks is half a month. Frequency
f is defined to be the number of events per unit time. For periodic motion, frequency is the number of oscillations per unit time.
The relationship between frequency and period is
(6.1)f = 1
T .
The SI unit for frequency is the cycle per second, which is defined to be a hertz (Hz):
(6.2)
1 Hz = 1cycle
sec or 1 Hz = 1
s
A cycle is one complete oscillation. Note that a vibration can be a single or multiple event, whereas oscillations are usually
repetitive for a significant number of cycles.
Example 6.1 Determine the Frequency of Two Oscillations: Medical Ultrasound and the Period of
Middle C
We can use the formulas presented in this module to determine both the frequency based on known oscillations and the
oscillation based on a known frequency. Let’s try one example of each. (a) A medical imaging device produces ultrasound by
oscillating with a period of 0.400 µs. What is the frequency of this oscillation? (b) The frequency of middle C on a typical
musical instrument is 264 Hz. What is the time for one complete oscillation?
Strategy
Both questions (a) and (b) can be answered using the relationship between period and frequency. In question (a), the period
T is given and we are asked to find frequency f . In question (b), the frequency f is given and we are asked to find the
period T .
Solution a
144 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12