Figure 6.34 Sounds emitted by a source moving to the right spread out from the points at which they were emitted. The wavelength is reduced and,
consequently, the frequency is increased in the direction of motion, so that the observer on the right hears a higher-pitch sound. The opposite is true for
the observer on the left, where the wavelength is increased and the frequency is reduced.
Figure 6.35 The same effect is produced when the observers move relative to the source. Motion toward the source increases frequency as the
observer on the right passes through more wave crests than she would if stationary. Motion away from the source decreases frequency as the observer
on the left passes through fewer wave crests than he would if stationary.
We know that wavelength and frequency are related by vw = fλ , where vw is the fixed speed of sound. The sound moves in a
medium and has the same speed vw in that medium whether the source is moving or not. Thus f multiplied by λ is a
constant. Because the observer on the right in Figure 6.34 receives a shorter wavelength, the frequency she receives must be
higher. Similarly, the observer on the left receives a longer wavelength, and hence he hears a lower frequency. The same thing
happens in Figure 6.35. A higher frequency is received by the observer moving toward the source, and a lower frequency is
received by an observer moving away from the source. In general, then, relative motion of source and observer toward one
another increases the received frequency. Relative motion apart decreases frequency. The greater the relative speed is, the
greater the effect.
The Doppler Effect
The Doppler effect occurs not only for sound but for any wave when there is relative motion between the observer and the
source. There are Doppler shifts in the frequency of sound, light, and water waves, for example. Doppler shifts can be used
to determine velocity, such as when ultrasound is reflected from blood in a medical diagnostic. The recession of galaxies is
determined by the shift in the frequencies of light received from them and has implied much about the origins of the
universe. Modern physics has been profoundly affected by observations of Doppler shifts.
Sonic Booms to Bow Wakes
What happens to the sound produced by a moving source, such as a jet airplane, that approaches or even exceeds the speed of
sound? The answer to this question applies not only to sound but to all other waves as well.
Suppose a jet airplane is coming nearly straight at you, emitting a sound of frequency fs . The greater the plane’s speed vs , the
greater the Doppler shift and the greater the value observed for fobs . Now, as vs approaches the speed of sound, fobs
approaches infinity. At the speed of sound, this result means that in front of the source, each successive wave is superimposed
on the previous one because the source moves forward at the speed of sound. The observer gets them all at the same instant,
and so the frequency is infinite. (Before airplanes exceeded the speed of sound, some people argued it would be impossible
because such constructive superposition would produce pressures great enough to destroy the airplane.) If the source exceeds
the speed of sound, no sound is received by the observer until the source has passed, so that the sounds from the approaching
source are mixed with those from it when receding. This mixing appears messy, but something interesting happens—a sonic
boom is created. (See Figure 6.36.)
Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves 165