In both parts, there is an impressive increase. First, the final angular velocity is large, although most world-class skaters can
achieve spin rates about this great. Second, the final kinetic energy is much greater than the initial kinetic energy. The
increase in rotational kinetic energy comes from work done by the skater in pulling in her arms. This work is internal work
that depletes some of the skater’s food energy.
There are several other examples of objects that increase their rate of spin because something reduced their moment of inertia.
Tornadoes are one example. Storm systems that create tornadoes are slowly rotating. When the radius of rotation narrows, even
in a local region, angular velocity increases, sometimes to the furious level of a tornado. Earth is another example. Our planet
was born from a huge cloud of gas and dust, the rotation of which came from turbulence in an even larger cloud. Gravitational
forces caused the cloud to contract, and the rotation rate increased as a result. (See Figure 7.16.)
Figure 7.16 The Solar System coalesced from a cloud of gas and dust that was originally rotating. The orbital motions and spins of the planets are in
the same direction as the original spin and conserve the angular momentum of the parent cloud.
In case of human motion, one would not expect angular momentum to be conserved when a body interacts with the environment
as its foot pushes off the ground. Astronauts floating in space aboard the International Space Station have no angular
momentum relative to the inside of the ship if they are motionless. Their bodies will continue to have this zero value no matter
how they twist about as long as they do not give themselves a push off the side of the vessel.
Check Your Undestanding
Is angular momentum completely analogous to linear momentum? What, if any, are their differences?
Solution
Yes, angular and linear momentums are completely analogous. While they are exact analogs they have different units and
are not directly inter-convertible like forms of energy are.
7.5 Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum
Angular momentum is a vector and, therefore, has direction as well as magnitude. Torque affects both the direction and the
magnitude of angular momentum. What is the direction of the angular momentum of a rotating object like the disk in Figure
7.17? The figure shows the right-hand rule used to find the direction of both angular momentum and angular velocity. Both L
and ω are vectors—each has direction and magnitude. Both can be represented by arrows. The right-hand rule defines both to
be perpendicular to the plane of rotation in the direction shown. Because angular momentum is related to angular velocity by
L = Iω , the direction of L is the same as the direction of ω . Notice in the figure that both point along the axis of rotation.
Chapter 7 | Rotation 187