person’s weight w = mg = ⎛
⎝80.0 kg⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝9.80 m/s2⎞
⎠ = 784 N . We take this force to be F in Hooke’s law. Knowing F and
x , we can then solve the spring constant k .
Solution
1. Solve Hooke’s law, F = −kx , for k :
(3.46)k = − F
x .
Substitute known values and solve k :
(3.47)k = − 784 N
−1.20×10−2 m
= 6.53×104 N/m.
Discussion
Note that F and x have opposite signs because they are in opposite directions—the restoring force is up, and the
displacement is down. Also, note that the car would oscillate up and down when the person got in if it were not for damping
(due to frictional forces) provided by shock absorbers. Bouncing cars are a sure sign of bad shock absorbers.
3.7 Friction
Friction is a force that is around us all the time that opposes relative motion between systems in contact but also allows us to
move (which you have discovered if you have ever tried to walk on ice). While a common force, the behavior of friction is actually
very complicated and is still not completely understood. We have to rely heavily on observations for whatever understandings we
can gain. However, we can still deal with its more elementary general characteristics and understand the circumstances in which
it behaves.
Friction
Friction is a force that opposes relative motion between systems in contact.
One of the simpler characteristics of friction is that it is parallel to the contact surface between systems and always in a direction
that opposes motion or attempted motion of the systems relative to each other. If two systems are in contact and moving relative
to one another, then the friction between them is called kinetic friction. For example, friction slows a hockey puck sliding on ice.
But when objects are stationary, static friction can act between them; the static friction is usually greater than the kinetic friction
between the objects.
Kinetic Friction
If two systems are in contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction between them is called kinetic friction.
Imagine, for example, trying to slide a heavy crate across a concrete floor—you may push harder and harder on the crate and
not move it at all. This means that the static friction responds to what you do—it increases to be equal to and in the opposite
direction of your push. But if you finally push hard enough, the crate seems to slip suddenly and starts to move. Once in motion it
is easier to keep it in motion than it was to get it started, indicating that the kinetic friction force is less than the static friction
force. If you add mass to the crate, say by placing a box on top of it, you need to push even harder to get it started and also to
keep it moving. Furthermore, if you oiled the concrete you would find it to be easier to get the crate started and keep it going (as
you might expect).
Figure 3.19 is a crude pictorial representation of how friction occurs at the interface between two objects. Close-up inspection of
these surfaces shows them to be rough. So when you push to get an object moving (in this case, a crate), you must raise the
object until it can skip along with just the tips of the surface hitting, break off the points, or do both. A considerable force can be
resisted by friction with no apparent motion. The harder the surfaces are pushed together (such as if another box is placed on
the crate), the more force is needed to move them. Part of the friction is due to adhesive forces between the surface molecules
of the two objects, which explain the dependence of friction on the nature of the substances. Adhesion varies with substances in
contact and is a complicated aspect of surface physics. Once an object is moving, there are fewer points of contact (fewer
molecules adhering), so less force is required to keep the object moving. At small but nonzero speeds, friction is nearly
independent of speed.
Chapter 3 | Dynamics 81