net external force:
Newton’s first law of motion:
Newton’s second law of motion:
Newton’s third law of motion:
Newton’s universal law of gravitation:
normal force:
restoring force:
spring constant:
static friction:
system:
tension:
thrust:
weight:
the vector sum of all external forces acting on an object or system; causes a mass to accelerate
a body at rest remains at rest, or, if in motion, remains in motion at a constant velocity unless
acted on by a net external force; also known as the law of inertia
The acceleration of a system is directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net
external force acting on the system, and inversely proportional to its mass.
Whenever one body exerts a force on a second body, the first body experiences a force by
the second body that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that it itself exerts.
every particle in the universe attracts every other particle with a force along a line
joining them; the force is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them
the force that a surface applies to an object to support the weight of the object; acts perpendicular to the
surface on which the object rests
force acting in opposition to the force caused by a deformation
a constant related to the rigidity of a system: the larger the spring constant, the more rigid the system; the
spring constant is represented by k
a force that opposes the motion of two systems that are in contact and are not moving relative to one another
the object or the group of objects under consideration
the pulling force that acts along a medium, especially a stretched flexible connector, such as a rope or cable; when a
rope supports the weight of an object, the force on the object due to the rope is called a tension force
a reaction force that pushes a body forward; rockets, airplanes, and cars are pushed forward by a thrust, a reaction
force to propellants pushed backward
the force due to gravity; w = mg for objects on Earth
Section Summary
3.1 Development of Force Concept
• Dynamics is the study of how forces affect the motion of objects.
• Force is a push or pull that can be defined in terms of various standards, and it is a vector having both magnitude and
direction.
3.2 Newton’s First Law of Motion: Inertia
• Newton’s first law of motion states that a body at rest remains at rest, or, if in motion, remains in motion at a constant
velocity unless acted on by a net external force. This is also known as the law of inertia.
• Inertia is the tendency of an object to remain at rest or remain in motion. Inertia is related to an object’s mass.
• Mass is the quantity of matter in a substance.
3.3 Newton's Second Law of Motion: Force and Acceleration
• Acceleration, a , is defined as a rate of change in velocity, resulting from a change in the magnitude and/or the direction of
the velocity.
• An external force is one acting on a system from outside the system, as opposed to internal forces, which act between
components within the system.
• Newton’s second law of motion states that the acceleration of a system is directly proportional to and in the same direction
as the net external force acting on the system, and inversely proportional to its mass.
• In equation form, Newton’s second law of motion is a = Fnet
m , often written in the more familiar form: Fnet = ma .
• The weight w of an object is defined as the force of gravity acting on an object of mass m . Given acceleration due to
gravity g , the magnitude of weight is:
w = mg
3.4 Newton’s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces
• Newton’s third law of motion represents a basic symmetry in nature. It states: Whenever one body exerts a force on a
second body, the first body experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that the first
body exerts.
94 Chapter 3 | Dynamics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12