• A thrust is a reaction force that pushes a body forward in response to a backward force. Rockets, airplanes, and cars are
pushed forward by a thrust reaction force.
3.5 Normal Force and Tension
• When objects rest on a surface, the surface applies a force to the object that supports the weight of the object. This
supporting force acts perpendicular to and away from the surface. It is called a normal force, and it also goes by the name
"apparent weight."
• When objects rest on a non-accelerating horizontal surface, the magnitude of the normal force is equal to the weight of the
object:
N = mg.
• The pulling force that acts along a stretched flexible connector, such as a rope or cable, is called tension, T . When a rope
supports the weight of an object that is at rest, the tension in the rope is equal to the weight of the object:
T = mg.
3.6 Spring Force: Hooke’s Law
• An oscillation is a back and forth motion of an object between two points of deformation.
• An oscillation may create a wave, which is a disturbance that propagates from where it was created.
• The simplest type of oscillations and waves are related to systems that can be described by Hooke’s law:
F = −kx,
where F is the restoring force, x is the displacement from equilibrium or deformation, and k is the spring constant of the
system.
3.7 Friction
• Friction is a contact force between systems that opposes the motion or attempted motion between them. Simple friction is
proportional to the normal force N pushing the systems together. (A normal force is always perpendicular to the contact
surface between systems.) Friction depends on both of the materials involved. The magnitude of static friction fs between
systems stationary relative to one another is given by
fs ≤ μsN,
where μs is the coefficient of static friction, which depends on both of the materials.
• The kinetic friction force fk between systems moving relative to one another is given by
fk = μkN,
where μk is the coefficient of kinetic friction, which also depends on both materials.
3.8 Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
• Newton’s universal law of gravitation: Every particle in the universe attracts every other particle with a force along a line
joining them. The force is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the
distance between them. In equation form, this is
F = GmM
r2 ,
where F is the magnitude of the gravitational force. G is the gravitational constant, given by
G = 6.673×10–11 N ⋅ m2/kg2 .
• Newton’s law of gravitation applies universally.
3.9 Centripetal Force
• Centripetal force Fc is any force causing uniform circular motion. It is a “center-seeking” force that always points toward
the center of rotation. It is perpendicular to linear velocity v and has magnitude
Fc = mac,
which can also be expressed as
Fc = mv2
r .
Chapter 3 | Dynamics 95