Figure 3.19 Frictional forces, such as f , always oppose motion or attempted motion between objects in contact. Friction arises in part because of the
roughness of the surfaces in contact, as seen in the expanded view. In order for the object to move, it must rise to where the peaks can skip along the
bottom surface. Thus a force is required just to set the object in motion. Some of the peaks will be broken off, also requiring a force to maintain motion.
Much of the friction is actually due to attractive forces between molecules making up the two objects, so that even perfectly smooth surfaces are not
friction-free. Such adhesive forces also depend on the substances the surfaces are made of, explaining, for example, why rubber-soled shoes slip less
than those with leather soles.
The magnitude of the frictional force has two forms: one for static situations (static friction), the other for when there is motion
(kinetic friction).
When there is no motion between the objects, the magnitude of static friction fs is
(3.48)fs ≤ μsN,
where μs is the coefficient of static friction and N is the magnitude of the normal force (the force perpendicular to the surface).
Magnitude of Static Friction
Magnitude of static friction fs is
(3.49)fs ≤ μsN,
where μs is the coefficient of static friction and N is the magnitude of the normal force.
The symbol ≤ means less than or equal to, implying that static friction can have a minimum and a maximum value of μs N .
Static friction is a responsive force that increases to be equal and opposite to whatever force is exerted, up to its maximum limit.
Once the applied force exceeds fs(max) , the object will move. Thus
(3.50)fs(max) = μsN.
Once an object is moving, the magnitude of kinetic friction fk is given by
(3.51)fk = μkN,
where μk is the coefficient of kinetic friction. A system in which fk = μkN is described as a system in which friction behaves
simply.
Magnitude of Kinetic Friction
The magnitude of kinetic friction fk is given by
(3.52)fk = μkN,
where μk is the coefficient of kinetic friction.
As seen in Table 3.1, the coefficients of kinetic friction are less than their static counterparts. That values of μ in Table 3.1 are
stated to only one or, at most, two digits is an indication of the approximate description of friction given by the above two
equations.
82 Chapter 3 | Dynamics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12