25. When you learn to drive, you discover that you need to let up slightly on the brake pedal as you come to a stop or the car will
stop with a jerk. Explain this in terms of the relationship between static and kinetic friction.
26. When you push a piece of chalk across a chalkboard, it sometimes screeches because it rapidly alternates between slipping
and sticking to the board. Describe this process in more detail, in particular explaining how it is related to the fact that kinetic
friction is less than static friction. (The same slip-grab process occurs when tires screech on pavement.)
3.8 Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
27. Action at a distance, such as is the case for gravity, was once thought to be illogical and therefore untrue. What is the
ultimate determinant of the truth in physics, and why was this action ultimately accepted?
28. Two friends are having a conversation. Anna says a satellite in orbit is in freefall because the satellite keeps falling toward
Earth. Tom says a satellite in orbit is not in freefall because the acceleration due to gravity is not 9.80 m/s2 . Who do you agree
with and why?
29. Newton’s laws of motion and gravity were among the first to convincingly demonstrate the underlying simplicity and unity in
nature. Many other examples have since been discovered, and we now expect to find such underlying order in complex
situations. Is there proof that such order will always be found in new explorations?
3.9 Centripetal Force
30. If you wish to reduce the stress (which is related to centripetal force) on high-speed tires, would you use large- or small-
diameter tires? Explain.
31. Define centripetal force. Can any type of force (for example, tension, gravitational force, friction, and so on) be a centripetal
force? Can any combination of forces be a centripetal force?
32. If centripetal force is directed toward the center, why do you feel that you are ‘thrown’ away from the center as a car goes
around a curve? Explain.
33. Race car drivers routinely cut corners as shown in Figure 3.33. Explain how this allows the curve to be taken at the greatest
speed.
Figure 3.33 Two paths around a race track curve are shown. Race car drivers will take the inside path (called cutting the corner) whenever possible
because it allows them to take the curve at the highest speed.
Chapter 3 | Dynamics 97