can you find an example (that is not in the textbook!) which covers each of all three cases, depending on changing
circumstances?
Exercise 3.2
As noted in the text, the normal force and the tension force can only act in one direction: the normal force can only push,
and the tension force can only pull. The numerical value of the force in these given directions is determined by what force is
necessary to keep a body in the observed state of motion (either not accelerating, in presence of other forces, or
accelerating at a particular rate). Under certain conditions, the normal force would go to zero (but not negative, as direction
can't reverse), as would the tension force.
Explain qualitatively what you would see as: (a) the normal force goes to zero, and (b) the tension force goes to zero.
3.6 Spring Force: Hooke’s Law
Figure 3.15 When displaced from its vertical equilibrium position, this plastic ruler oscillates back and forth because of the restoring force opposing
displacement. When the ruler is on the left, there is a force to the right, and vice versa.
Newton’s first law implies that an object oscillating back and forth is experiencing forces. Without force, the object would move in
a straight line at a constant speed rather than oscillate. Consider, for example, plucking a plastic ruler to the left as shown in
Figure 3.15. The deformation of the ruler creates a force in the opposite direction, known as a restoring force. Once released,
the restoring force causes the ruler to move back toward its stable equilibrium position, where the net force on it is zero.
However, by the time the ruler gets there, it gains momentum and continues to move to the right, producing the opposite
deformation. It is then forced to the left, back through equilibrium, and the process is repeated until dissipative forces dampen the
motion. These forces remove mechanical energy from the system, gradually reducing the motion until the ruler comes to rest.
The simplest oscillations occur when the restoring force is directly proportional to displacement. This is called Hooke’s law force,
or spring force:
(3.45)F = −kx.
Here, F is the restoring force, x is the displacement from equilibrium or deformation, and k is a constant related to the
difficulty in deforming the system. The minus sign indicates the restoring force is in the direction opposite to the displacement.
Figure 3.16 (a) The plastic ruler has been released, and the restoring force is returning the ruler to its equilibrium position. (b) The net force is zero at
the equilibrium position, but the ruler has momentum and continues to move to the right. (c) The restoring force is in the opposite direction. It stops the
ruler and moves it back toward equilibrium again. (d) Now the ruler has momentum to the left. (e) In the absence of damping (caused by frictional
forces), the ruler reaches its original position. From there, the motion will repeat itself.
The spring constant k is related to the rigidity (or stiffness) of a system—the larger the spring constant, the greater the
restoring force, and the stiffer the system. The units of k are newtons per meter (N/m). Figure 3.17 shows a graph of the
absolute value of the restoring force versus the displacement for a system that can be described by Hooke’s law—a simple
Chapter 3 | Dynamics 79