Conceptual Questions
3.1 Development of Force Concept
1. Propose a force standard different from the example of a stretched spring discussed in the text. Your standard must be
capable of producing the same force repeatedly.
2. What properties do forces have that allow us to classify them as vectors?
3.2 Newton’s First Law of Motion: Inertia
3. How are inertia and mass related?
4. What is the relationship between weight and mass? Which is an intrinsic, unchanging property of a body?
3.3 Newton's Second Law of Motion: Force and Acceleration
5. Which statement is correct? (a) Net force causes motion. (b) Net force causes change in motion. Explain your answer and
give an example.
6. Why can we neglect forces such as those holding a body together when we apply Newton’s second law of motion?
7. Explain how the choice of the “system of interest” affects which forces must be considered when applying Newton’s second
law of motion.
8. Describe a situation in which the net external force on a system is not zero, yet its speed remains constant.
9. A system can have a nonzero velocity while the net external force on it is zero. Describe such a situation.
10. A rock is thrown straight up. What is the net external force acting on the rock when it is at the top of its trajectory?
11. (a) Give an example of different net external forces acting on the same system to produce different accelerations. (b) Give an
example of the same net external force acting on systems of different masses, producing different accelerations. (c) What law
accurately describes both effects? State it in words and as an equation.
12. If the acceleration of a system is zero, are no external forces acting on it? What about internal forces? Explain your answers.
13. If a constant, nonzero force is applied to an object, what can you say about the velocity and acceleration of the object?
14. The gravitational force on the basketball in Figure 3.5 is ignored. When gravity is taken into account, what is the direction of
the net external force on the basketball—above horizontal, below horizontal, or still horizontal?
3.4 Newton’s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces
15. When you take off in a jet aircraft, there is a sensation of being pushed back into the seat. Explain why you move backward
in the seat—is there really a force backward on you? (The same reasoning explains whiplash injuries, in which the head is
apparently thrown backward.)
16. A device used since the 1940s to measure the kick or recoil of the body due to heart beats is the “ballistocardiograph.” What
physics principle(s) are involved here to measure the force of cardiac contraction? How might we construct such a device?
17. Describe a situation in which one system exerts a force on another and, as a consequence, experiences a force that is equal
in magnitude and opposite in direction. Which of Newton’s laws of motion apply?
18. Why does an ordinary rifle recoil (kick backward) when fired? The barrel of a recoilless rifle is open at both ends. Describe
how Newton’s third law applies when one is fired. Can you safely stand close behind one when it is fired?
19. An American football lineman reasons that it is senseless to try to out-push the opposing player, since no matter how hard he
pushes he will experience an equal and opposite force from the other player. Use Newton’s laws and draw a free-body diagram
of an appropriate system to explain how he can still out-push the opposition if he is strong enough.
20. Newton’s third law of motion tells us that forces always occur in pairs of equal and opposite magnitude. Explain how the
choice of the “system of interest” affects whether one such pair of forces cancels.
3.6 Spring Force: Hooke’s Law
21. Describe a system which undergoes an oscillation under a Hooke's law force.
22. Imagine an object under a hypothetical force behaving opposite to Hooke's law force. That is, instead of restoring force (
F = −kx , with the negative sign indicating that the force acts in the opposite direction of displacement), the force reinforces an
initial displacement: F = +kx . What would happen to this object if it is placed at the equilibrium ( x = 0 ) and then very slightly
disturbed?
3.7 Friction
23. Define normal force. What is its relationship to friction when friction behaves simply?
24. The glue on a piece of tape can exert forces. Can these forces be a type of simple friction? Explain, considering especially
that tape can stick to vertical walls and even to ceilings.
96 Chapter 3 | Dynamics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12