toward it. The reason is the same—the high velocity of the air between the car and the truck creates a region of lower pressure,
and the vehicles are pushed together by greater pressure on the outside. (See Figure 8.20.) This effect was observed as far
back as the mid-1800s, when it was found that trains passing in opposite directions tipped precariously toward one another.
Figure 8.20 An overhead view of a car passing a truck on a highway. Air passing between the vehicles flows in a narrower channel and must increase
its speed ( v2 is greater than v1 ), causing the pressure between them to drop ( Pi is less than Po ). Greater pressure on the outside pushes the
car and truck together.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation with a Sheet of Paper
Hold the short edge of a sheet of paper parallel to your mouth with one hand on each side of your mouth. The page should
slant downward over your hands. Blow over the top of the page. Describe what happens and explain the reason for this
behavior.
Bernoulli’s Equation
The relationship between pressure and velocity in fluids is described quantitatively by Bernoulli’s equation, named after its
discoverer, the Swiss scientist Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782). Bernoulli’s equation states that for an incompressible, frictionless
fluid, the following sum is constant:
(8.58)P + 1
2 ρv2 + ρgh = constant,
where P is the absolute pressure, ρ is the fluid density, v is the velocity of the fluid, h is the height above some reference
point, and g is the acceleration due to gravity. If we follow a small volume of fluid along its path, various quantities in the sum
may change, but the total remains constant. Let the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to any two points along the path that the bit of fluid
follows; Bernoulli’s equation becomes
(8.59)P1 + 1
2 ρv1
2 + ρgh1 = P2 + 1
2 ρv2
2 +ρgh2.
Bernoulli’s equation is a form of the conservation of energy principle. Note that the second and third terms are the kinetic and
potential energy with m replaced by ρ . In fact, each term in the equation has units of energy per unit volume. We can prove
this for the second term by substituting ρ = m / V into it and gathering terms:
(8.60)
1
2 ρv2 =
1
2mv2
V = KE
V .
So 1
2 ρv2 is the kinetic energy per unit volume. Making the same substitution into the third term in the equation, we find
(8.61)
ρgh = mgh
V =
PEg
V ,
so ρgh is the gravitational potential energy per unit volume. Note that pressure P has units of energy per unit volume, too.
Since P = F / A , its units are N/m2 . If we multiply these by m/m, we obtain N ⋅ m/m3 = J/m3 , or energy per unit volume.
Bernoulli’s equation is, in fact, just a convenient statement of conservation of energy for an incompressible fluid in the absence of
friction.
Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
Conservation of energy applied to fluid flow produces Bernoulli’s equation. The net work done by the fluid’s pressure results
214 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12