Example 8.7 Calculating Density: Is the Coin Authentic?
The mass of an ancient Greek coin is determined in air to be 8.630 g. When the coin is submerged in water as shown in
Figure 8.17, its apparent mass is 7.800 g. Calculate its density, given that water has a density of 1.000 g/cm3 and that
effects caused by the wire suspending the coin are negligible.
Strategy
To calculate the coin’s density, we need its mass (which is given) and its volume. The volume of the coin equals the volume
of water displaced. The volume of water displaced Vw can be found by solving the equation for density ρ = m
V for V .
Solution
The volume of water is Vw = mw
ρw where mw is the mass of water displaced. As noted, the mass of the water displaced
equals the apparent mass loss, which is mw = 8.630 g−7.800 g = 0.830 g . Thus the volume of water is
Vw = 0.830 g
1.000 g/cm3 = 0.830 cm3 . This is also the volume of the coin, since it is completely submerged. We can now find
the density of the coin using the definition of density:
(8.41)
ρc = mc
Vc
= 8.630 g
0.830 cm3 = 10.4 g/cm3.
Discussion
You see that this density is very close to that of pure silver, appropriate for this type of ancient coin. Most modern
counterfeits are not pure silver.
This brings us back to Archimedes’ principle and how it came into being. As the story goes, the king of Syracuse gave
Archimedes the task of determining whether the royal crown maker was supplying a crown of pure gold. The purity of gold is
difficult to determine by color (it can be diluted with other metals and still look as yellow as pure gold), and other analytical
techniques had not yet been conceived. Even ancient peoples, however, realized that the density of gold was greater than that of
any other then-known substance. Archimedes purportedly agonized over his task and had his inspiration one day while at the
public baths, pondering the support the water gave his body. He came up with his now-famous principle, saw how to apply it to
determine density, and ran naked down the streets of Syracuse crying “Eureka!” (Greek for “I have found it”). Similar behavior
can be observed in contemporary physicists from time to time!
8.6 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity
Flow rate Q is defined to be the volume of fluid passing by some location through an area during a period of time, as seen in
Figure 8.18. In symbols, this can be written as
(8.42)Q = V
t ,
where V is the volume and t is the elapsed time.
The SI unit for flow rate is m3 /s , but a number of other units for Q are in common use. For example, the heart of a resting
adult pumps blood at a rate of 5.00 liters per minute (L/min). Note that a liter (L) is 1/1000 of a cubic meter or 1000 cubic
centimeters ( 10−3 m3 or 103 cm3 ). In this text we shall use whatever metric units are most convenient for a given situation.
Figure 8.18 Flow rate is the volume of fluid per unit time flowing past a point through the area A . Here the shaded cylinder of fluid flows past point P
in a uniform pipe in time t . The volume of the cylinder is Ad and the average velocity is v¯ = d / t so that the flow rate is Q = Ad / t = A v¯ .
210 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12