Figure 8.7 Pressure is exerted on all sides of this swimmer, since the water would flow into the space he occupies if he were not there. The arrows
represent the directions and magnitudes of the forces exerted at various points on the swimmer. Note that the forces are larger underneath, due to
greater depth, giving a net upward or buoyant force that is balanced by the weight of the swimmer.
8.4 Pressure Due to the Weight of Fluid
If your ears have ever popped on a plane flight or ached during a deep dive in a swimming pool, you have experienced the effect
of depth on pressure in a fluid. At the Earth’s surface, the air pressure exerted on you is a result of the weight of air above you.
This pressure is reduced as you climb up in altitude and the weight of air above you decreases. Under water, the pressure
exerted on you increases with increasing depth. In this case, the pressure being exerted upon you is a result of both the weight
of water above you and that of the atmosphere above you. You may notice an air pressure change on an elevator ride that
transports you many stories, but you need only dive a meter or so below the surface of a pool to feel a pressure increase. The
difference is that water is much denser than air, about 775 times as dense.
Consider the container in Figure 8.8. Its bottom supports the weight of the fluid in it. Let us calculate the pressure exerted on the
bottom by the weight of the fluid. That pressure is the weight of the fluid mg divided by the area A supporting it (the area of
the bottom of the container):
(8.12)P = mg
A .
We can find the mass of the fluid from its volume and density:
(8.13)m = ρV.
The volume of the fluid V is related to the dimensions of the container. It is
(8.14)V = Ah,
where A is the cross-sectional area and h is the depth. Combining the last two equations gives
(8.15)m = ρAh.
If we enter this into the expression for pressure, we obtain
(8.16)
P =
⎛
⎝ρAh⎞
⎠g
A .
The area cancels, and rearranging the variables yields
(8.17)P = ρgh.
This value is the pressure due to the weight of a fluid. The equation has general validity beyond the special conditions under
which it is derived here. Even if the container were not there, the surrounding fluid would still exert this pressure, keeping the
fluid static. Thus the equation P = ρgh represents the pressure due to the weight of any fluid of average density ρ at any
depth h below its surface. For liquids, which are nearly incompressible, this equation holds to great depths.
Chapter 8 | Fluids 201