18. Figure 8.25 shows how sandbags placed around a leak outside a river levee can effectively stop the flow of water under the
levee. Explain how the small amount of water inside the column formed by the sandbags is able to balance the much larger body
of water behind the levee.
Figure 8.25 Because the river level is very high, it has started to leak under the levee. Sandbags are placed around the leak, and the water held by
them rises until it is the same level as the river, at which point the water there stops rising.
19. Is there a net force on a dam due to atmospheric pressure? Explain your answer.
20. Does atmospheric pressure add to the gas pressure in a rigid tank? In a toy balloon? When, in general, does atmospheric
pressure not affect the total pressure in a fluid?
21. You can break a strong wine bottle by pounding a cork into it with your fist, but the cork must press directly against the liquid
filling the bottle—there can be no air between the cork and liquid. Explain why the bottle breaks, and why it will not if there is air
between the cork and liquid.
8.5 Archimedes’ Principle
22. More force is required to pull the plug in a full bathtub than when it is empty. Does this contradict Archimedes’ principle?
Explain your answer.
23. Do fluids exert buoyant forces in a “weightless” environment, such as in the space shuttle? Explain your answer.
24. Will the same ship float higher in salt water than in freshwater? Explain your answer.
25. Marbles dropped into a partially filled bathtub sink to the bottom. Part of their weight is supported by buoyant force, yet the
downward force on the bottom of the tub increases by exactly the weight of the marbles. Explain why.
8.6 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity
26. What is the difference between flow rate and fluid velocity? How are they related?
27. Many figures in the text show streamlines. Explain why fluid velocity is greatest where streamlines are closest together. (Hint:
Consider the relationship between fluid velocity and the cross-sectional area through which it flows.)
28. Identify some substances that are incompressible and some that are not.
8.7 Bernoulli’s Equation
29. You can squirt water a considerably greater distance by placing your thumb over the end of a garden hose and then
releasing, than by leaving it completely uncovered. Explain how this works.
30. Water is shot nearly vertically upward in a decorative fountain and the stream is observed to broaden as it rises. Conversely,
a stream of water falling straight down from a faucet narrows. Explain why, and discuss whether surface tension enhances or
reduces the effect in each case.
31. Look back to Figure 8.20. Answer the following two questions. Why is Po less than atmospheric? Why is Po greater than
Pi ?
32. Give an example of entrainment not mentioned in the text.
33. Many entrainment devices have a constriction, called a Venturi, such as shown in Figure 8.26. How does this bolster
entrainment?
220 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12