(8.35)
specific gravity = ρ¯
ρw,
where ρ¯ is the average density of the object or substance and ρw is the density of water at 4.00°C. Specific gravity is
dimensionless, independent of whatever units are used for ρ . If an object floats, its specific gravity is less than one. If it sinks, its
specific gravity is greater than one. Moreover, the fraction of a floating object that is submerged equals its specific gravity. If an
object’s specific gravity is exactly 1, then it will remain suspended in the fluid, neither sinking nor floating. Scuba divers try to
obtain this state so that they can hover in the water. We measure the specific gravity of fluids, such as battery acid, radiator fluid,
and urine, as an indicator of their condition. One device for measuring specific gravity is shown in Figure 8.15.
Specific Gravity
Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of an object to a fluid (usually water).
Figure 8.15 This hydrometer is floating in a fluid of specific gravity 0.87. The glass hydrometer is filled with air and weighted with lead at the bottom. It
floats highest in the densest fluids and has been calibrated and labeled so that specific gravity can be read from it directly.
Example 8.6 Calculating Average Density: Floating Woman
Suppose a 60.0-kg woman floats in freshwater with 97.0% of her volume submerged when her lungs are full of air. What is
her average density?
Strategy
We can find the woman’s density by solving the equation
(8.36)
fraction submerged =
ρ¯
obj
ρfl
for the density of the object. This yields
(8.37)ρ¯
obj = ρ¯ person = (fraction submerged) ⋅ ρfl.
We know both the fraction submerged and the density of water, and so we can calculate the woman’s density.
Solution
Entering the known values into the expression for her density, we obtain
(8.38)
ρ¯ person = 0.970 ⋅ ⎛
⎝103 kg
m3
⎞
⎠ = 970 kg
m3.
Discussion
Her density is less than the fluid density. We expect this because she floats. Body density is one indicator of a person’s
percent body fat, of interest in medical diagnostics and athletic training. (See Figure 8.16.)
208 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12