The calculated number, 2.68×1025 , is certainly very large. You might say that the volume of a cubic meter is also large (
1 m3 = 1000 L ), but even in a small volume of 1cm3 , which is about size of a thimble ( 1cm3 = 10−6 m3 ), a gas at
STP has 2.68×1019 molecules in it (still a very large number). Once again, note that N is the same for all types or
mixtures of gases.
9.3 Heat
We have defined work as force times distance and learned that work done on an object changes its kinetic energy. We have also
seen that temperature is proportional to the (average) kinetic energy of atoms and molecules. We say that a thermal system has
a certain internal energy: its internal energy is higher if the temperature is higher. If two objects at different temperatures are
brought in contact with each other, energy is transferred from the hotter to the colder object until equilibrium is reached and the
bodies reach thermal equilibrium (i.e., they are at the same temperature). No work is done by either object, because no force
acts through a distance. The transfer of energy is caused by the temperature difference, and ceases once the temperatures are
equal. These observations lead to the following definition of heat: Heat is the spontaneous transfer of energy due to a
temperature difference.
Heat is often confused with temperature. For example, we may say the heat was unbearable, when we actually mean that the
temperature was high. Heat is a form of energy, whereas temperature is not. The misconception arises because we are sensitive
to the flow of heat, rather than the temperature.
Owing to the fact that heat is a form of energy, it has the SI unit of joule (J). The calorie (cal) is a common unit of energy, defined
as the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by 1.00ºC —specifically, between 14.5ºC and 15.5ºC ,
since there is a slight temperature dependence. Perhaps the most common unit of heat is the kilocalorie (kcal), which is the
energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water by 1.00ºC . Since mass is most often specified in kilograms,
kilocalorie is commonly used. Food calories (given the notation Cal, and sometimes called “big calorie”) are actually kilocalories (
1 kilocalorie = 1000 calories ), a fact not easily determined from package labeling.
Figure 9.13 In figure (a) the soft drink and the ice have different temperatures, T1 and T2 , and are not in thermal equilibrium. In figure (b), when the
soft drink and ice are allowed to interact, energy is transferred until they reach the same temperature T′ , achieving equilibrium. Heat transfer occurs
due to the difference in temperatures. In fact, since the soft drink and ice are both in contact with the surrounding air and bench, the equilibrium
temperature will be the same for both.
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat
It is also possible to change the temperature of a substance by doing work. Work can transfer energy into or out of a system.
This realization helped establish the fact that heat is a form of energy. James Prescott Joule (1818–1889) performed many
experiments to establish the mechanical equivalent of heat—the work needed to produce the same effects as heat transfer. In
terms of the units used for these two terms, the best modern value for this equivalence is
(9.11)1.000 kcal = 4186 J.
We consider this equation as the conversion between two different units of energy.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 233