Applications of Bernoulli’s Principle
There are a number of devices and situations in which fluid flows at a constant height and, thus, can be analyzed with Bernoulli’s
principle.
Entrainment
People have long put the Bernoulli principle to work by using reduced pressure in high-velocity fluids to move things about. With
a higher pressure on the outside, the high-velocity fluid forces other fluids into the stream. This process is called entrainment.
Entrainment devices have been in use since ancient times, particularly as pumps to raise water small heights, as in draining
swamps, fields, or other low-lying areas. Some other devices that use the concept of entrainment are shown in Figure 8.21.
Figure 8.21 Examples of entrainment devices that use increased fluid speed to create low pressures, which then entrain one fluid into another. (a) A
Bunsen burner uses an adjustable gas nozzle, entraining air for proper combustion. (b) An atomizer uses a squeeze bulb to create a jet of air that
entrains drops of perfume. Paint sprayers and carburetors use very similar techniques to move their respective liquids. (c) A common aspirator uses a
high-speed stream of water to create a region of lower pressure. Aspirators may be used as suction pumps in dental and surgical situations or for
draining a flooded basement or producing a reduced pressure in a vessel. (d) The chimney of a water heater is designed to entrain air into the pipe
leading through the ceiling.
Wings and Sails
The airplane wing is a beautiful example of Bernoulli’s principle in action. Figure 8.22(a) shows the characteristic shape of a
wing. The wing is tilted upward at a small angle and the upper surface is longer, causing air to flow faster over it. The pressure
on top of the wing is therefore reduced, creating a net upward force or lift. (Wings can also gain lift by pushing air downward,
utilizing the conservation of momentum principle. The deflected air molecules result in an upward force on the wing — Newton’s
third law.) Sails also have the characteristic shape of a wing. (See Figure 8.22(b).) The pressure on the front side of the sail,
Pfront , is lower than the pressure on the back of the sail, Pback . This results in a forward force and even allows you to sail into
the wind.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation with Two Strips of Paper
For a good illustration of Bernoulli’s principle, make two strips of paper, each about 15 cm long and 4 cm wide. Hold the
small end of one strip up to your lips and let it drape over your finger. Blow across the paper. What happens? Now hold two
strips of paper up to your lips, separated by your fingers. Blow between the strips. What happens?
Velocity measurement
Figure 8.23 shows two devices that measure fluid velocity based on Bernoulli’s principle. The manometer in Figure 8.23(a) is
connected to two tubes that are small enough not to appreciably disturb the flow. The tube facing the oncoming fluid creates a
dead spot having zero velocity ( v1 = 0 ) in front of it, while fluid passing the other tube has velocity v2 . This means that
Bernoulli’s principle as stated in P1 + 1
2 ρv1
2 = P2 + 1
2 ρv2
2 becomes
(8.67)P1 = P2 + 1
2 ρv2
2 .
216 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12