(8.30)mw = ρwVw = ⎛
⎝1.000×103 kg/m3⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝1.00×105 m3⎞
⎠
= 1.00×108 kg.
The maximum buoyant force is the weight of this much water, or
(8.31)FB = ww = mwg = ⎛
⎝1.00×108 kg⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝9.80 m/s2⎞
⎠
= 9.80×108 N.
Discussion
The maximum buoyant force is ten times the weight of the steel, meaning the ship can carry a load nine times its own weight
without sinking.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation
A piece of household aluminum foil is 0.016 mm thick. Use a piece of foil that measures 10 cm by 15 cm. (a) What is the
mass of this amount of foil? (b) If the foil is folded to give it four sides, and paper clips or washers are added to this “boat,”
what shape of the boat would allow it to hold the most “cargo” when placed in water? Test your prediction.
Density and Archimedes’ Principle
Density plays a crucial role in Archimedes’ principle. The average density of an object is what ultimately determines whether it
floats. If its average density is less than that of the surrounding fluid, it will float. This is because the fluid, having a higher density,
contains more mass and hence more weight in the same volume. The buoyant force, which equals the weight of the fluid
displaced, is thus greater than the weight of the object. Likewise, an object denser than the fluid will sink.
The extent to which a floating object is submerged depends on how the object’s density is related to that of the fluid. In Figure
8.14, for example, the unloaded ship has a lower density and less of it is submerged compared with the same ship loaded. We
can derive a quantitative expression for the fraction submerged by considering density. The fraction submerged is the ratio of the
volume submerged to the volume of the object, or
(8.32)
fraction submerged =Vsub
Vobj
= Vfl
Vobj
.
The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid displaced, which we call Vfl . Now we can obtain the relationship between the
densities by substituting ρ = m
V into the expression. This gives
(8.33)Vfl
Vobj
= mfl / ρfl
mobj / ρ¯
obj
,
where ρ¯
obj is the average density of the object and ρfl is the density of the fluid. Since the object floats, its mass and that of
the displaced fluid are equal, and so they cancel from the equation, leaving
(8.34)
fraction submerged =
ρ¯
obj
ρfl .
Figure 8.14 An unloaded ship (a) floats higher in the water than a loaded ship (b).
We use this last relationship to measure densities. This is done by measuring the fraction of a floating object that is
submerged—for example, with a hydrometer. It is useful to define the ratio of the density of an object to a fluid (usually water) as
specific gravity:
Chapter 8 | Fluids 207