8.7 Bernoulli’s Equation
• Bernoulli’s equation states that the sum on each side of the following equation is constant, or the same at any two points in
an incompressible frictionless fluid:
P1 + 1
2 ρv1
2 + ρgh1 = P2 + 1
2 ρv2
2 + ρgh2.
• Bernoulli’s principle is Bernoulli’s equation applied to situations in which depth is constant. The terms involving depth (or
height h ) subtract out, yielding
P1 + 1
2 ρv1
2 = P2 + 1
2 ρv2
2.
• Bernoulli’s principle has many applications, including entrainment, wings and sails, and velocity measurement.
Conceptual Questions
8.1 What Is a Fluid?
1. What physical characteristic distinguishes a fluid from a solid?
2. Which of the following substances are fluids at room temperature: air, mercury, water, glass?
3. Why are gases easier to compress than liquids and solids?
4. How do gases differ from liquids?
8.2 Density
5. Approximately how does the density of air vary with altitude?
6. Give an example in which density is used to identify the substance composing an object. Would information in addition to
average density be needed to identify the substances in an object composed of more than one material?
7. Figure 8.24 shows a glass of ice water filled to the brim. Will the water overflow when the ice melts? Explain your answer.
Figure 8.24
8.3 Pressure
8. How is pressure related to the sharpness of a knife and its ability to cut?
9. Why does a dull hypodermic needle hurt more than a sharp one?
10. The outward force on one end of an air tank was calculated in Example 8.2. How is this force balanced? (The tank does not
accelerate, so the force must be balanced.)
11. Why is force exerted by static fluids always perpendicular to a surface?
12. In a remote location near the North Pole, an iceberg floats in a lake. Next to the lake (assume it is not frozen) sits a
comparably sized glacier sitting on land. If both chunks of ice should melt due to rising global temperatures (and the melted ice
all goes into the lake), which ice chunk would give the greatest increase in the level of the lake water, if any?
13. How do jogging on soft ground and wearing padded shoes reduce the pressures to which the feet and legs are subjected?
14. Toe dancing (as in ballet) is much harder on toes than normal dancing or walking. Explain in terms of pressure.
15. How do you convert pressure units like millimeters of mercury, centimeters of water, and inches of mercury into units like
newtons per meter squared without resorting to a table of pressure conversion factors?
8.4 Pressure Due to the Weight of Fluid
16. Atmospheric pressure exerts a large force (equal to the weight of the atmosphere above your body—about 10 tons) on the
top of your body when you are lying on the beach sunbathing. Why are you able to get up?
17. What are two reasons why mercury rather than water is used in barometers?
Chapter 8 | Fluids 219