Figure 9.16 The heat Q transferred to cause a temperature change depends on the magnitude of the temperature change, the mass of the system,
and the substance and phase involved. (a) The amount of heat transferred is directly proportional to the temperature change. To double the
temperature change of a mass m , you need to add twice the heat. (b) The amount of heat transferred is also directly proportional to the mass. To
cause an equivalent temperature change in a doubled mass, you need to add twice the heat. (c) The amount of heat transferred depends on the
substance and its phase. If it takes an amount Q of heat to cause a temperature change ΔT in a given mass of copper, it will take 10.8 times that
amount of heat to cause the equivalent temperature change in the same mass of water assuming no phase change in either substance.
The dependence on temperature change and mass are easily understood. Owing to the fact that the (average) kinetic energy of
an atom or molecule is proportional to the absolute temperature, the internal energy of a system is proportional to the absolute
temperature and the number of atoms or molecules. Owing to the fact that the transferred heat is equal to the change in the
internal energy, the heat is proportional to the mass of the substance and the temperature change. The transferred heat also
depends on the substance so that, for example, the heat necessary to raise the temperature is less for alcohol than for water. For
the same substance, the transferred heat also depends on the phase (gas, liquid, or solid).
Heat Transfer and Temperature Change
The quantitative relationship between heat transfer and temperature change contains all three factors:
(9.12)Q = mcΔT,
where Q is the symbol for heat transfer, m is the mass of the substance, and ΔT is the change in temperature. The
symbol c stands for specific heat and depends on the material and phase. The specific heat is the amount of heat
necessary to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of mass by 1.00ºC . The specific heat c is a property of the substance; its
SI unit is J/(kg ⋅ K) or J/(kg⋅ºC). Recall that the temperature change (ΔT) is the same in units of kelvin and degrees
Celsius. If heat transfer is measured in kilocalories, then the unit of specific heat is kcal/(kg⋅ºC).
Values of specific heat must generally be looked up in tables, because there is no simple way to calculate them. In general, the
specific heat also depends on the temperature. Table 9.1 lists representative values of specific heat for various substances.
Except for gases, the temperature and volume dependence of the specific heat of most substances is weak. We see from this
table that the specific heat of water is five times that of glass and ten times that of iron, which means that it takes five times as
much heat to raise the temperature of water the same amount as for glass and ten times as much heat to raise the temperature
of water as for iron. In fact, water has one of the largest specific heats of any material, which is important for sustaining life on
Earth.
Example 9.3 Calculating the Required Heat: Heating Water in an Aluminum Pan
A 0.500 kg aluminum pan on a stove is used to heat 0.250 liters of water from 20.0ºC to 80.0ºC . (a) How much heat is
required? What percentage of the heat is used to raise the temperature of (b) the pan and (c) the water?
Strategy
The pan and the water are always at the same temperature. When you put the pan on the stove, the temperature of the
236 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12