Figure 8.16 Subject in a “fat tank,” where he is weighed while completely submerged as part of a body density determination. The subject must
completely empty his lungs and hold a metal weight in order to sink. Corrections are made for the residual air in his lungs (measured separately) and
the metal weight. His corrected submerged weight, his weight in air, and pinch tests of strategic fatty areas are used to calculate his percent body fat.
There are many obvious examples of lower-density objects or substances floating in higher-density fluids—oil on water, a hot-air
balloon, a bit of cork in wine, an iceberg, and hot wax in a “lava lamp,” to name a few. Less obvious examples include lava rising
in a volcano and mountain ranges floating on the higher-density crust and mantle beneath them. Even seemingly solid Earth has
fluid characteristics.
More Density Measurements
One of the most common techniques for determining density is shown in Figure 8.17.
Figure 8.17 (a) A coin is weighed in air. (b) The apparent weight of the coin is determined while it is completely submerged in a fluid of known density.
These two measurements are used to calculate the density of the coin.
An object, here a coin, is weighed in air and then weighed again while submerged in a liquid. The density of the coin, an
indication of its authenticity, can be calculated if the fluid density is known. This same technique can also be used to determine
the density of the fluid if the density of the coin is known. All of these calculations are based on Archimedes’ principle.
Archimedes’ principle states that the buoyant force on the object equals the weight of the fluid displaced. This, in turn, means
that the object appears to weigh less when submerged; we call this measurement the object’s apparent weight. The object
suffers an apparent weight loss equal to the weight of the fluid displaced. Alternatively, on balances that measure mass, the
object suffers an apparent mass loss equal to the mass of fluid displaced. That is
(8.39)apparent weight loss = weight of fluid displaced
or
(8.40)apparent mass loss = mass of fluid displaced.
The next example illustrates the use of this technique.
Chapter 8 | Fluids 209