Figure 9.9 Graph of pressure versus temperature for various gases kept at a constant volume. Note that all of the graphs extrapolate to zero pressure
at the same temperature.
Thermal Equilibrium and the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
Thermometers actually take their own temperature, not the temperature of the object they are measuring. This raises the
question of how we can be certain that a thermometer measures the temperature of the object with which it is in contact. It is
based on the fact that any two systems placed in thermal contact (meaning heat transfer can occur between them) will reach the
same temperature. That is, heat will flow from the hotter object to the cooler one until they have exactly the same temperature.
The objects are then in thermal equilibrium, and no further changes will occur. The systems interact and change because their
temperatures differ, and the changes stop once their temperatures are the same. Thus, if enough time is allowed for this transfer
of heat to run its course, the temperature a thermometer registers does represent the system with which it is in thermal
equilibrium. Thermal equilibrium is established when two bodies are in contact with each other and can freely exchange energy.
Furthermore, experimentation has shown that if two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each another, and B is in
thermal equilibrium with a third system C, then A is also in thermal equilibrium with C. This conclusion may seem obvious,
because all three have the same temperature, but it is basic to thermodynamics. It is called the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
If two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each other, and B is in thermal equilibrium with a third system, C,
then A is also in thermal equilibrium with C.
This law was postulated in the 1930s, after the first and second laws of thermodynamics had been developed and named. It is
called the zeroth law because it comes logically before the first and second laws. An example of this law in action is seen in
babies in incubators: babies in incubators normally have very few clothes on, so to an observer they look as if they may not be
warm enough. However, the temperature of the air, the cot, and the baby is the same, because they are in thermal equilibrium,
which is accomplished by maintaining air temperature to keep the baby comfortable.
Check Your Understanding
Does the temperature of a body depend on its size?
Solution
No, the system can be divided into smaller parts each of which is at the same temperature. We say that the temperature is
an intensive quantity. Intensive quantities are independent of size.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 229