(8.24)
h = 1.01×105 N/m2
(1.00×103 kg/m3)(9.80 m/s2)
= 10.3 m.
Discussion
Just 10.3 m of water creates the same pressure as 120 km of air (height of uppermost layers of atmosphere). Since water is
nearly incompressible, we can neglect any change in its density over this depth.
What do you suppose is the total pressure at a depth of 10.3 m in a swimming pool? Does the atmospheric pressure on the
water’s surface affect the pressure below? The answer is yes. This seems only logical, since both the water’s weight and the
atmosphere’s weight must be supported. So the total pressure at a depth of 10.3 m is 2 atm—half from the water above and half
from the air above.
8.5 Archimedes’ Principle
When you rise from lounging in a warm bath, your arms feel strangely heavy. This is because you no longer have the buoyant
support of the water. Where does this buoyant force come from? Why is it that some things float and others do not? Do objects
that sink get any support at all from the fluid? Is your body buoyed by the atmosphere, or are only helium balloons affected? (See
Figure 8.11.)
Figure 8.11 (a) Even objects that sink, like this anchor, are partly supported by water when submerged. (b) Submarines have adjustable density
(ballast tanks) so that they may float or sink as desired. (credit: Allied Navy) (c) Helium-filled balloons tug upward on their strings, demonstrating air’s
buoyant effect. (credit: Crystl)
Answers to all these questions, and many others, are based on the fact that pressure increases with depth in a fluid. This means
that the upward force on the bottom of an object in a fluid is greater than the downward force on the top of the object. There is a
net upward, or buoyant force on any object in any fluid. (See Figure 8.12.) If the buoyant force is greater than the object’s
weight, the object will rise to the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less than the object’s weight, the object will sink. If the
buoyant force equals the object’s weight, the object will remain suspended at that depth. The buoyant force is always present
whether the object floats, sinks, or is suspended in a fluid.
Buoyant Force
The buoyant force is the net upward force on any object in any fluid.
204 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12