Example 8.8 Calculating Volume from Flow Rate: The Heart Pumps a Lot of Blood in a Lifetime
How many cubic meters of blood does the heart pump in a 75-year lifetime, assuming the average flow rate is 5.00 L/min?
Strategy
Time and flow rate Q are given, and so the volume V can be calculated from the definition of flow rate.
Solution
Solving Q = V / t for volume gives
(8.43)V = Qt.
Substituting known values yields
(8.44)
V = ⎛
⎝
5.00 L
1 min
⎞
⎠(75 y)⎛
⎝
1 m3
103 L
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝5.26×105min
y
⎞
⎠
= 2.0×105 m3 .
Discussion
This amount is about 200,000 tons of blood. For comparison, this value is equivalent to about 200 times the volume of water
contained in a 6-lane 50-m lap pool.
Flow rate and velocity are related, but quite different, physical quantities. To make the distinction clear, think about the flow rate
of a river. The greater the velocity of the water, the greater the flow rate of the river. But flow rate also depends on the size of the
river. A rapid mountain stream carries far less water than the Amazon River in Brazil, for example. The precise relationship
between flow rate Q and velocity v¯ is
(8.45)Q = A v¯ ,
where A is the cross-sectional area and v¯ is the average velocity. This equation seems logical enough. The relationship tells
us that flow rate is directly proportional to both the magnitude of the average velocity (hereafter referred to as the speed) and the
size of a river, pipe, or other conduit. The larger the conduit, the greater its cross-sectional area. Figure 8.18 illustrates how this
relationship is obtained. The shaded cylinder has a volume
(8.46)V = Ad,
which flows past the point P in a time t . Dividing both sides of this relationship by t gives
(8.47)V
t = Ad
t .
We note that Q = V / t and the average speed is v¯ = d / t . Thus the equation becomes Q = A v¯ .
Figure 8.19 shows an incompressible fluid flowing along a pipe of decreasing radius. Because the fluid is incompressible, the
same amount of fluid must flow past any point in the tube in a given time to ensure continuity of flow. In this case, because the
cross-sectional area of the pipe decreases, the velocity must necessarily increase. This logic can be extended to say that the
flow rate must be the same at all points along the pipe. In particular, for points 1 and 2,
(8.48)
Q1 = Q2
A1 v¯
1 = A2 v¯
2
⎫
⎭
⎬.
This is called the equation of continuity and is valid for any incompressible fluid. The consequences of the equation of continuity
can be observed when water flows from a hose into a narrow spray nozzle: it emerges with a large speed—that is the purpose of
the nozzle. Conversely, when a river empties into one end of a reservoir, the water slows considerably, perhaps picking up speed
again when it leaves the other end of the reservoir. In other words, speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases, and
speed decreases when cross-sectional area increases.
Chapter 8 | Fluids 211