fluids:
liter:
pressure:
pressure due to the weight of fluid:
specific gravity:
liquids and gases; a fluid is a state of matter that yields to shearing forces
a unit of volume, equal to 10−3 m3
the force per unit area perpendicular to the force, over which the force acts
pressure at a depth below a fluid surface due to its weight; given by P = ρgh
the ratio of the density of an object to a fluid (usually water)
Section Summary
8.1 What Is a Fluid?
• A fluid is a state of matter that yields to sideways or shearing forces. Liquids and gases are both fluids. Fluid statics is the
physics of stationary fluids.
8.2 Density
• Density is the mass per unit volume of a substance or object. In equation form, density is defined as
ρ = m
V .
• The SI unit of density is kg/m3 .
8.3 Pressure
• Pressure is the force per unit perpendicular area over which the force is applied. In equation form, pressure is defined as
P = F
A.
• The SI unit of pressure is pascal and 1 Pa = 1 N/m2 .
8.4 Pressure Due to the Weight of Fluid
• Pressure is the weight of the fluid mg divided by the area A supporting it (the area of the bottom of the container):
P = mg
A .
• Pressure due to the weight of a liquid is given by
P = ρgh,
where P is the pressure, ρ is the density of the liquid, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and h is the height of the
liquid.
8.5 Archimedes’ Principle
• Buoyant force is the net upward force on any object in any fluid. If the buoyant force is greater than the object’s weight, the
object will rise to the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less than the object’s weight, the object will sink. If the
buoyant force equals the object’s weight, the object will remain suspended at that depth. The buoyant force is always
present whether the object floats, sinks, or is suspended in a fluid.
• Archimedes’ principle states that the buoyant force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it displaces.
• Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of an object to a fluid (usually water).
8.6 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity
• Flow rate Q is defined to be the volume V flowing past a point in time t , or Q = V
t where V is volume and t is time.
• The SI unit of volume is m3 .
• Another common unit is the liter (L), which is 10−3 m3 .
• Flow rate and velocity are related by Q = A v¯ where A is the cross-sectional area of the flow and v¯ is its average
velocity.
• For incompressible fluids, flow rate at various points is constant. That is,
Q1 = Q2
A1 v¯
1 = A2 v¯
2
n1 A1 v¯
1 = n2A2 v¯
2
⎫
⎭
⎬
⎪
⎪
.
218 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12