9.2 The Ideal Gas Law
Figure 9.10 The air inside this hot air balloon flying over Putrajaya, Malaysia, is hotter than the ambient air. As a result, the balloon experiences a
buoyant force pushing it upward. (credit: Kevin Poh, Flickr)
In this section, we continue to explore the thermal behavior of gases. In particular, we examine the characteristics of atoms and
molecules that compose gases. (Most gases, for example nitrogen, N2 , and oxygen, O2 , are composed of two or more atoms.
We will primarily use the term “molecule” in discussing a gas because the term can also be applied to monatomic gases, such as
helium.)
Gases are easily compressed. Gases expand and contract very rapidly with temperature changes. In addition, you will note that
most gases expand at the same rate, or have the same β . This raises the question as to why gases should all act in nearly the
same way, when liquids and solids have widely varying expansion rates.
The answer lies in the large separation of atoms and molecules in gases, compared to their sizes, as illustrated in Figure 9.11.
Because atoms and molecules have large separations, forces between them can be ignored, except when they collide with each
other during collisions. The motion of atoms and molecules (at temperatures well above the boiling temperature) is fast, such that
the gas occupies all of the accessible volume and the expansion of gases is rapid. In contrast, in liquids and solids, atoms and
molecules are closer together and are quite sensitive to the forces between them.
Figure 9.11 Atoms and molecules in a gas are typically widely separated, as shown. Because the forces between them are quite weak at these
distances, the properties of a gas depend more on the number of atoms per unit volume and on temperature than on the type of atom.
To get some idea of how pressure, temperature, and volume of a gas are related to one another, consider what happens when
you pump air into an initially deflated tire. The tire’s volume first increases in direct proportion to the amount of air injected,
without much increase in the tire pressure. Once the tire has expanded to nearly its full size, the walls limit volume expansion. If
we continue to pump air into it, the pressure increases. The pressure will further increase when the car is driven and the tires
move. Most manufacturers specify optimal tire pressure for cold tires. (See Figure 9.12.)
230 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12