Figure 9.14 Schematic depiction of Joule’s experiment that established the equivalence of heat and work.
The figure above shows one of Joule’s most famous experimental setups for demonstrating the mechanical equivalent of heat. It
demonstrated that work and heat can produce the same effects, and helped establish the principle of conservation of energy.
Gravitational potential energy (PE) (work done by the gravitational force) is converted into kinetic energy (KE), and then
randomized by viscosity and turbulence into increased average kinetic energy of atoms and molecules in the system, producing
a temperature increase. His contributions to the field of thermodynamics were so significant that the SI unit of energy was named
after him.
Heat added or removed from a system changes its internal energy and thus its temperature. Such a temperature increase is
observed while cooking. However, adding heat does not necessarily increase the temperature. An example is melting of ice; that
is, when a substance changes from one phase to another. Work done on the system or by the system can also change the
internal energy of the system. Joule demonstrated that the temperature of a system can be increased by stirring. If an ice cube is
rubbed against a rough surface, work is done by the frictional force. A system has a well-defined internal energy, but we cannot
say that it has a certain “heat content” or “work content”. We use the phrase “heat transfer” to emphasize its nature.
Check Your Understanding
Two samples (A and B) of the same substance are kept in a lab. Someone adds 10 kilojoules (kJ) of heat to one sample,
while 10 kJ of work is done on the other sample. How can you tell to which sample the heat was added?
Solution
Heat and work both change the internal energy of the substance. However, the properties of the sample only depend on the
internal energy so that it is impossible to tell whether heat was added to sample A or B.
9.4 Heat Transfer Methods
Equally as interesting as the effects of heat transfer on a system are the methods by which this occurs. Whenever there is a
temperature difference, heat transfer occurs. Heat transfer may occur rapidly, such as through a cooking pan, or slowly, such as
through the walls of a picnic ice chest. We can control rates of heat transfer by choosing materials (such as thick wool clothing
for the winter), controlling air movement (such as the use of weather stripping around doors), or by choice of color (such as a
white roof to reflect summer sunlight). So many processes involve heat transfer, so that it is hard to imagine a situation where no
heat transfer occurs. Yet every process involving heat transfer takes place by only three methods:
1. Conduction is heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact. (The matter is stationary on a macroscopic
scale—we know there is thermal motion of the atoms and molecules at any temperature above absolute zero.) Heat
transferred between the electric burner of a stove and the bottom of a pan is transferred by conduction.
2. Convection is the heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of a fluid. This type of transfer takes place in a forced-air
furnace and in weather systems, for example.
3. Heat transfer by radiation occurs when microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, or another form of electromagnetic
radiation is emitted or absorbed. An obvious example is the warming of the Earth by the Sun. A less obvious example is
thermal radiation from the human body.
234 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12