32. One method of converting heat transfer into doing work is for heat transfer into a gas to take place, which expands, doing
work on a piston, as shown in the figure below. (a) Is the heat transfer converted directly to work in an isobaric process, or does it
go through another form first? Explain your answer. (b) What about in an isothermal process? (c) What about in an adiabatic
process (where heat transfer occurred prior to the adiabatic process)?
Figure 9.55
33. Would the previous question make any sense for an isochoric process? Explain your answer.
34. We ordinarily say that ΔU = 0 for an isothermal process. Does this assume no phase change takes place? Explain your
answer.
35. The temperature of a rapidly expanding gas decreases. Explain why in terms of the first law of thermodynamics. (Hint:
Consider whether the gas does work and whether heat transfer occurs rapidly into the gas through conduction.)
36. A real process may be nearly adiabatic if it occurs over a very short time. How does the short time span help the process to
be adiabatic?
37. It is unlikely that a process can be isothermal unless it is a very slow process. Explain why. Is the same true for isobaric and
isochoric processes? Explain your answer.
9.9 Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency
38. Imagine you are driving a car up Pike’s Peak in Colorado. To raise a car weighing 1000 kilograms a distance of 100 meters
would require about a million joules. You could raise a car 12.5 kilometers with the energy in a gallon of gas. Driving up Pike's
Peak (a mere 3000-meter climb) should consume a little less than a quart of gas. But other considerations have to be taken into
account. Explain, in terms of efficiency, what factors may keep you from realizing your ideal energy use on this trip.
39. Is a temperature difference necessary to operate a heat engine? State why or why not.
40. Definitions of efficiency vary depending on how energy is being converted. Compare the definitions of efficiency for the
human body and heat engines. How does the definition of efficiency in each relate to the type of energy being converted into
doing work?
282 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12