listed together here for convenience:
(10.49)P = IV
(10.50)
P = V 2
R
(10.51)P = I 2R.
Note that the first equation is always valid, whereas the other two can be used only for resistors. In a simple circuit, with one
voltage source and a single resistor, the power supplied by the voltage source and that dissipated by the resistor are identical. (In
more complicated circuits, P can be the power dissipated by a single device and not the total power in the circuit.)
Different insights can be gained from the three different expressions for electric power. For example, P = V 2 / R implies that
the lower the resistance connected to a given voltage source, the greater the power delivered. Furthermore, since voltage is
squared in P = V 2 / R , the effect of applying a higher voltage is perhaps greater than expected. Thus, when the voltage is
doubled to a 25-W bulb, its power nearly quadruples to about 100 W, burning it out. If the bulb’s resistance remained constant, its
power would be exactly 100 W, but at the higher temperature its resistance is higher, too.
Example 10.10 Calculating Power Dissipation and Current
Consider the example given in "Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits." Then find the power dissipated by the car
headlight.
Strategy
For the headlight, we know voltage and current, so we can use P = IV to find the power.
Solution
Entering the known values of current and voltage for the hot headlight, we obtain
(10.52)P = IV = (2.50 A)(12.0 V) = 30.0 W.
Discussion
The 30 W dissipated by the hot headlight is typical.
The Cost of Electricity
The more electric appliances you use and the longer they are left on, the higher your electric bill. This familiar fact is based on
the relationship between energy and power. You pay for the energy used. Since P = E / t , we see that
(10.53)E = Pt
is the energy used by a device using power P for a time interval t . For example, the more lightbulbs burning, the greater P
used; the longer they are on, the greater t is. The energy unit on electric bills is the kilowatt-hour ( kW ⋅ h ), consistent with the
relationship E = Pt . It is easy to estimate the cost of operating electric appliances if you have some idea of their power
consumption rate in watts or kilowatts, the time they are on in hours, and the cost per kilowatt-hour for your electric utility.
Kilowatt-hours, like all other specialized energy units such as food calories, can be converted to joules. You can prove to yourself
that 1 kW ⋅ h = 3.6×106 J .
The electrical energy ( E ) used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the power consumption of that
appliance or fixture. This will not only reduce the cost, but it will also result in a reduced impact on the environment.
Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a home or business. About 20% of
a home’s use of energy goes to lighting, while the number for commercial establishments is closer to 40%. Fluorescent lights are
about four times more efficient than incandescent lights—this is true for both the long tubes and the compact fluorescent lights
(CFL). (See Figure 10.37(b).) Thus, a 60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL, which has the same brightness
and color. CFLs have a bent tube inside a globe or a spiral-shaped tube, all connected to a standard screw-in base that fits
standard incandescent light sockets. (Original problems with color, flicker, shape, and high initial investment for CFLs have been
addressed in recent years.) The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they last up to 10 times longer. The significance of an
investment in such bulbs is addressed in the next example. New white LED lights (which are clusters of small LED bulbs) are
even more efficient (twice that of CFLs) and last 5 times longer than CFLs. However, their cost is still high.
Making Connections: Energy, Power, and Time
The relationship E = Pt is one that you will find useful in many different contexts. The energy your body uses in exercise is
related to the power level and duration of your activity, for example. The amount of heating by a power source is related to
the power level and time it is applied. Even the radiation dose of an X-ray image is related to the power and time of
exposure.
316 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12