Figure 10.24 Excess charge on a nonuniform conductor becomes most concentrated at the location of greatest curvature. (a) The forces between
identical pairs of charges at either end of the conductor are identical, but the components of the forces parallel to the surface are different. It is F∥
that moves the charges apart once they have reached the surface. (b) F∥ is smallest at the more pointed end, the charges are left closer together,
producing the electric field shown. (c) An uncharged conductor in an originally uniform electric field is polarized, with the most concentrated charge at
its most pointed end.
Applications of Conductors
On a very sharply curved surface, such as shown in Figure 10.25, the charges are so concentrated at the point that the resulting
electric field can be great enough to remove them from the surface. This can be useful.
Lightning rods work best when they are most pointed. The large charges created in storm clouds induce an opposite charge on a
building that can result in a lightning bolt hitting the building. The induced charge is bled away continually by a lightning rod,
preventing the more dramatic lightning strike.
Of course, we sometimes wish to prevent the transfer of charge rather than to facilitate it. In that case, the conductor should be
very smooth and have as large a radius of curvature as possible (see Figure 10.26, which shows a Van de Graaff generator).
Smooth surfaces are used on high-voltage transmission lines, for example, to avoid leakage of charge into the air.
Another device that makes use of some of these principles is a Faraday cage. This is a metal shield that encloses a volume. All
electrical charges will reside on the outside surface of this shield, and there will be no electrical field inside. A Faraday cage is
used to prohibit stray electrical fields in the environment from interfering with sensitive measurements, such as the electrical
signals inside a nerve cell.
During electrical storms if you are driving a car, it is best to stay inside the car as its metal body acts as a Faraday cage with zero
electrical field inside. If in the vicinity of a lightning strike, its effect is felt on the outside of the car and the inside is unaffected,
provided you remain totally inside. This is also true if an active (“hot”) electrical wire was broken (in a storm or an accident) and
fell on your car.
Figure 10.25 A very pointed conductor has a large charge concentration at the point. The electric field is very strong at the point and can exert a force
large enough to transfer charge on or off the conductor. Lightning rods are used to prevent the buildup of large excess charges on structures and, thus,
are pointed.
306 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12