Figure 9.43 Heat pumps, air conditioners, and refrigerators are heat engines operated backward. The one shown here is based on a Carnot
(reversible) engine. (a) Schematic diagram showing heat transfer from a cold reservoir to a warm reservoir with a heat pump. The directions of W ,
Qh , and Qc are opposite what they would be in a heat engine. (b) PV diagram for a Carnot cycle similar to that in Figure 9.44 but reversed,
following path ADCBA. The area inside the loop is negative, meaning there is a net work input. There is heat transfer Qc into the system from a cold
reservoir along path DC, and heat transfer Qh out of the system into a hot reservoir along path BA.
Heat Pumps
The great advantage of using a heat pump to keep your home warm, rather than just burning fuel, is that a heat pump supplies
Qh = Qc + W . Heat transfer is from the outside air, even at a temperature below freezing, to the indoor space. You only pay
for W , and you get an additional heat transfer of Qc from the outside at no cost; in many cases, at least twice as much energy
is transferred to the heated space as is used to run the heat pump. When you burn fuel to keep warm, you pay for all of it. The
disadvantage is that the work input (required by the second law of thermodynamics) is sometimes more expensive than simply
burning fuel, especially if the work is done by electrical energy.
The basic components of a heat pump in its heating mode are shown in Figure 9.44. A working fluid such as a non-CFC
refrigerant is used. In the outdoor coils (the evaporator), heat transfer Qc occurs to the working fluid from the cold outdoor air,
turning it into a gas.
Figure 9.44 A simple heat pump has four basic components: (1) condenser, (2) expansion valve, (3) evaporator, and (4) compressor. In the heating
mode, heat transfer Qc occurs to the working fluid in the evaporator (3) from the colder outdoor air, turning it into a gas. The electrically driven
compressor (4) increases the temperature and pressure of the gas and forces it into the condenser coils (1) inside the heated space. Because the
temperature of the gas is higher than the temperature in the room, heat transfer from the gas to the room occurs as the gas condenses to a liquid. The
working fluid is then cooled as it flows back through an expansion valve (2) to the outdoor evaporator coils.
The electrically driven compressor (work input W ) raises the temperature and pressure of the gas and forces it into the
condenser coils that are inside the heated space. Because the temperature of the gas is higher than the temperature inside the
264 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12