10.6 Conductors and Applications of Electrostatics
Conductors contain free charges that move easily. When excess charge is placed on a conductor or the conductor is put into a
static electric field, charges in the conductor quickly respond to reach a steady state called electrostatic equilibrium.
Figure 10.20 shows the effect of an electric field on free charges in a conductor. The free charges move until the field is
perpendicular to the conductor’s surface. There can be no component of the field parallel to the surface in electrostatic
equilibrium, since, if there were, it would produce further movement of charge.
Figure 10.20 When an electric field E is applied to a conductor, free charges inside the conductor move until the field is perpendicular to the surface.
(a) The electric field is a vector quantity, with both parallel and perpendicular components. The parallel component ( E∥ ) exerts a force ( F∥ ) on
the free charge q , which moves the charge until F∥ = 0 . (b) The resulting field is perpendicular to the surface. The free charge has been brought
to the conductor’s surface, leaving electrostatic forces in equilibrium. A positive free charge is shown in the figure for the example, but the result holds
similarly for a negative free charge.
A conductor placed in an electric field will be polarized. Figure 10.21 shows the result of placing a neutral conductor in an
originally uniform electric field. The field becomes stronger near the conductor but entirely disappears inside it.
Figure 10.21 This illustration shows a spherical conductor in static equilibrium with an originally uniform electric field. Free charges move within the
conductor, polarizing it, until the electric field lines are perpendicular to the surface. The field lines end on excess negative charge on one section of the
surface and begin again on excess positive charge on the opposite side. No electric field exists inside the conductor, since free charges in the
conductor would continue moving in response to any field until it was neutralized.
Misconception Alert: Electric Field inside a Conductor
Excess charges placed on a spherical conductor repel and move until they are evenly distributed, as shown in Figure 10.22.
Excess charge is forced to the surface until the field inside the conductor is zero. Outside the conductor, the field is exactly
the same as if the conductor were replaced by a point charge at its center equal to the excess charge.
304 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12