• The entropy of a system in a given state (a macrostate) can be written as
S = klnW,
where k = 1.38×10–23 J/K is Boltzmann’s constant, and lnW is the natural logarithm of the number of microstates W
corresponding to the given macrostate.
Conceptual Questions
9.1 Temperature
1. What does it mean to say that two systems are in thermal equilibrium?
2. Give an example of a physical property that varies with temperature and describe how it is used to measure temperature.
3. When a cold alcohol thermometer is placed in a hot liquid, the column of alcohol goes down slightly before going up. Explain
why.
4. If you add boiling water to a cup at room temperature, what would you expect the final equilibrium temperature of the unit to
be? You will need to include the surroundings as part of the system. Consider the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
9.2 The Ideal Gas Law
5. Under what circumstances would you expect a gas to behave significantly differently than predicted by the ideal gas law?
6. A constant-volume gas thermometer contains a fixed amount of gas. What property of the gas is measured to indicate its
temperature?
9.3 Heat
7. How is heat transfer related to temperature?
8. Describe a situation in which heat transfer occurs. What are the resulting forms of energy?
9. When heat transfers into a system, is the energy stored as heat? Explain briefly.
9.4 Heat Transfer Methods
10. What are the main methods of heat transfer from the hot core of Earth to its surface? From Earth’s surface to outer space?
When our bodies get too warm, they respond by sweating and increasing blood circulation to the surface to transfer thermal
energy away from the core. What effect will this have on a person in a 40.0ºC hot tub?
Figure 9.54 shows a cut-away drawing of a thermos bottle (also known as a Dewar flask), which is a device designed specifically
to slow down all forms of heat transfer. Explain the functions of the various parts, such as the vacuum, the silvering of the walls,
the thin-walled long glass neck, the rubber support, the air layer, and the stopper.
Figure 9.54 The construction of a thermos bottle is designed to inhibit all methods of heat transfer.
9.5 Temperature Change and Heat Capacity
11. What three factors affect the heat transfer that is necessary to change an object’s temperature?
12. The brakes in a car increase in temperature by ΔT when bringing the car to rest from a speed v . How much greater would
ΔT be if the car initially had twice the speed? You may assume the car to stop sufficiently fast so that no heat transfers out of
the brakes.
280 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12