• Describe a simple circuit.
10.9. Electric Power and Energy
• Calculate the power dissipated by a resistor and power supplied by a power supply.
• Calculate the cost of electricity under various circumstances.
10.10. Resistors in Series and Parallel
• Draw a circuit with resistors in parallel and in series.
• Calculate the voltage drop of a current across a resistor using Ohm’s law.
• Contrast the way total resistance is calculated for resistors in series and in parallel.
• Explain why total resistance of a parallel circuit is less than the smallest resistance of any of the resistors in that
circuit.
• Calculate total resistance of a circuit that contains a mixture of resistors connected in series and in parallel.
10.11. Electric Hazards and the Human Body
• Define thermal hazard, shock hazard, and short circuit.
• Explain what effects various levels of current have on the human body.
Introduction to Electricity
The image of American politician and scientist Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) flying a kite in a thunderstorm is familiar to every
schoolchild. (See Figure 10.2.) In this experiment, Franklin demonstrated a connection between lightning and static electricity.
Sparks were drawn from a key hung on a kite string during an electrical storm. These sparks were like those produced by static
electricity, such as the spark that jumps from your finger to a metal doorknob after you walk across a wool carpet. What Franklin
demonstrated in his dangerous experiment was a connection between phenomena on two different scales: one the grand power
of an electrical storm, the other an effect of more human proportions. Connections like this one reveal the underlying unity of the
laws of nature, an aspect we humans find particularly appealing.
Figure 10.2 When Benjamin Franklin demonstrated that lightning was related to static electricity, he made a connection that is now part of the evidence
that all directly experienced forces except the gravitational force are manifestations of the electromagnetic force.
Our understanding of electricity and the range of phenomena that are electrical in nature has vastly expanded since those early
days. For example, atomic and molecular interactions, such as the forces of friction, cohesion, and adhesion, are now known to
be manifestations of the electromagnetic force. Static electricity is just one aspect of the electromagnetic force, which also
includes moving electricity and magnetism. Furthermore, All the macroscopic forces that we experience directly, such as the
sensations of touch and the tension in a rope, are due to the electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces in nature.
The gravitational force, another fundamental force, is actually sensed through the electromagnetic interaction of molecules, such
as between those in our feet and those on the top of a bathroom scale. (The other two fundamental forces, the strong nuclear
force and the weak nuclear force, cannot be sensed on the human scale.)
In this chapter, we will develop the concepts of electric fields and electric potential (also known as voltage), which are used to
describe electric force and electrical energy. Consider, for example, great amounts of electrical energy stored in batteries or
transmitted cross-country through power lines, or consider electrical signals sent in our nervous systems at molecular levels, with
ions crossing cell membranes and transferring information, or the role of electricity in our household appliances and devices,
including your laptop and smartphones. We will look at the laws that help us describe electric circuits and begin to explore some
of the many applications of electricity.
288 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12