9.6 Phase Change and Latent Heat
13. Heat transfer can cause temperature and phase changes. What else can cause these changes?
14. How does the latent heat of fusion of water help slow the decrease of air temperatures, perhaps preventing temperatures
from falling significantly below 0ºC , in the vicinity of large bodies of water?
15. What is the temperature of ice right after it is formed by freezing water?
16. If you place 0ºC ice into 0ºC water in an insulated container, what will happen? Will some ice melt, will more water freeze,
or will neither take place?
17. What effect does condensation on a glass of ice water have on the rate at which the ice melts? Will the condensation speed
up the melting process or slow it down?
18. In very humid climates where there are numerous bodies of water, such as in Florida, it is unusual for temperatures to rise
above about 35ºC(95ºF) . In deserts, however, temperatures can rise far above this. Explain how the evaporation of water
helps limit high temperatures in humid climates.
19. In winters, it is often warmer in San Francisco than in nearby Sacramento, 150 km inland. In summers, it is nearly always
hotter in Sacramento. Explain how the bodies of water surrounding San Francisco moderate its extreme temperatures.
20. Putting a lid on a boiling pot greatly reduces the heat transfer necessary to keep it boiling. Explain why.
21. Freeze-dried foods have been dehydrated in a vacuum. During the process, the food freezes and must be heated to facilitate
dehydration. Explain both how the vacuum speeds up dehydration and why the food freezes as a result.
22. When still air cools by radiating at night, it is unusual for temperatures to fall below the dew point. Explain why.
23. In a physics classroom demonstration, an instructor inflates a balloon by mouth and then cools it in liquid nitrogen. When
cold, the shrunken balloon has a small amount of light blue liquid in it, as well as some snow-like crystals. As it warms up, the
liquid boils, and part of the crystals sublimate, with some crystals lingering for awhile and then producing a liquid. Identify the
blue liquid and the two solids in the cold balloon. Justify your identifications using data from Table 9.2.
9.7 The First Law of Thermodynamics
24. Describe the photo of the tea kettle at the beginning of this section in terms of heat transfer, work done, and internal energy.
How is heat being transferred? What is the work done and what is doing it? How does the kettle maintain its internal energy?
25. The first law of thermodynamics and the conservation of energy are clearly related. How do they differ in the types of energy
considered?
26. Heat transfer Q and work done W are always energy in transit, whereas internal energy U is energy stored in a system.
Give an example of each type of energy, and state specifically how it is either in transit or resides in a system.
27. How do heat transfer and internal energy differ? In particular, which can be stored as such in a system and which cannot?
28. If you run down some stairs and stop, what happens to your kinetic energy and your initial gravitational potential energy?
29. Give an explanation of how food energy (calories) can be viewed as molecular potential energy (consistent with the atomic
and molecular definition of internal energy).
30. Identify the type of energy transferred to your body in each of the following as either internal energy, heat transfer, or doing
work: (a) basking in sunlight; (b) eating food; (c) riding an elevator to a higher floor.
9.8 The First Law of Thermodynamics and Heat Engine Processes
31. A great deal of effort, time, and money has been spent in the quest for the so-called perpetual-motion machine, which is
defined as a hypothetical machine that operates or produces useful work indefinitely and/or a hypothetical machine that
produces more work or energy than it consumes. Explain, in terms of heat engines and the first law of thermodynamics, why or
why not such a machine is likely to be constructed.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 281