days. It is the evaporation of sweat (or water from a sprinkler or pool) that cools us off.
Any physical property that depends on temperature, and whose response to temperature is reproducible, can be used as the
basis of a thermometer. Because many physical properties depend on temperature, the variety of thermometers is remarkable.
For example, volume increases with temperature for most substances. This property is the basis for the common alcohol
thermometer, the old mercury thermometer, and the bimetallic strip (Figure 9.3). Other properties used to measure temperature
include electrical resistance and color, as shown in Figure 9.4, and the emission of infrared radiation, as shown in Figure 9.5.
Figure 9.3 The curvature of a bimetallic strip depends on temperature. (a) The strip is straight at the starting temperature, where its two components
have the same length. (b) At a higher temperature, this strip bends to the right, because the metal on the left has expanded more than the metal on the
right.
Figure 9.4 Each of the six squares on this plastic (liquid crystal) thermometer contains a film of a different heat-sensitive liquid crystal material. Below
95ºF , all six squares are black. When the plastic thermometer is exposed to temperature that increases to 95ºF , the first liquid crystal square
changes color. When the temperature increases above 96.8ºF the second liquid crystal square also changes color, and so forth. (credit: Arkrishna,
Wikimedia Commons)
Figure 9.5 Fireman Jason Ormand uses a pyrometer to check the temperature of an aircraft carrier’s ventilation system. Infrared radiation (whose
emission varies with temperature) from the vent is measured and a temperature readout is quickly produced. Infrared measurements are also
frequently used as a measure of body temperature. These modern thermometers, placed in the ear canal, are more accurate than alcohol
thermometers placed under the tongue or in the armpit. (credit: Lamel J. Hinton/U.S. Navy)
Temperature Scales
Thermometers are used to measure temperature according to well-defined scales of measurement, which use pre-defined
reference points to help compare quantities. The three most common temperature scales are the Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin
scales. A temperature scale can be created by identifying two easily reproducible temperatures. The freezing and boiling
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 225