Figure 9.39 Schematic diagram of a pressurized water nuclear reactor and the steam turbines that convert work into electrical energy. Heat
exchange is used to generate steam, in part to avoid contamination of the generators with radioactivity. Two turbines are used because this is less
expensive than operating a single generator that produces the same amount of electrical energy. The steam is condensed to liquid before being
returned to the heat exchanger, to keep exit steam pressure low and aid the flow of steam through the turbines (equivalent to using a lower-
temperature cold reservoir). The considerable energy associated with condensation must be dissipated into the local environment; in this
example, a cooling tower is used so there is no direct heat transfer to an aquatic environment. (Note that the water going to the cooling tower
does not come into contact with the steam flowing over the turbines.)
Strategy
Since temperatures are given for the hot and cold reservoirs of this heat engine, EffC = 1 − Tc
Th can be used to calculate
the Carnot (maximum theoretical) efficiency. Those temperatures must first be converted to kelvins.
Solution
The hot and cold reservoir temperatures are given as 300ºC and 27.0ºC , respectively. In kelvins, then, Th = 573 K
and Tc = 300 K , so that the maximum efficiency is
(9.55)
EffC = 1 − Tc
Th.
Thus,
(9.56)EffC = 1 − 300 K
573 K
= 0.476, or 47.6%.
Discussion
A typical nuclear power station’s actual efficiency is about 35%, a little better than 0.7 times the maximum possible value, a
tribute to superior engineering. Electrical power stations fired by coal, oil, and natural gas have greater actual efficiencies
(about 42%), because their boilers can reach higher temperatures and pressures. The cold reservoir temperature in any of
these power stations is limited by the local environment. Figure 9.40 shows (a) the exterior of a nuclear power station and
(b) the exterior of a coal-fired power station. Both have cooling towers into which water from the condenser enters the tower
near the top and is sprayed downward, cooled by evaporation.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 261