direction that positive charge would flow. Depending on the situation, positive charges, negative charges, or both may move. In
metal wires, for example, current is carried by electrons—that is, negative charges move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water,
both positive and negative charges move. This is also true in nerve cells. A Van de Graaff generator used for nuclear research
can produce a current of pure positive charges, such as protons. Figure 10.34 illustrates the movement of charged particles that
compose a current. The fact that conventional current is taken to be in the direction that positive charge would flow can be traced
back to American politician and scientist Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s. He named the type of charge associated with electrons
negative, long before they were known to carry current in so many situations. Franklin, in fact, was totally unaware of the small-
scale structure of electricity.
It is important to realize that there is an electric field in conductors responsible for producing the current, as illustrated in Figure
10.34. Unlike static electricity, where a conductor in equilibrium cannot have an electric field in it, conductors carrying a current
have an electric field and are not in static equilibrium. An electric field is needed to supply energy to move the charges.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Electric Current Illustration
Find a straw and little peas that can move freely in the straw. Place the straw flat on a table and fill the straw with peas.
When you pop one pea in at one end, a different pea should pop out the other end. This demonstration is an analogy for an
electric current. Identify what compares to the electrons and what compares to the supply of energy. What other analogies
can you find for an electric current?
Note that the flow of peas is based on the peas physically bumping into each other; electrons flow due to mutually repulsive
electrostatic forces.
Figure 10.34 Current I is the rate at which charge moves through an area A , such as the cross-section of a wire. Conventional current is defined to
move in the direction of the electric field. (a) Positive charges move in the direction of the electric field and the same direction as conventional current.
(b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electric field. Conventional current is in the direction opposite to the movement of negative
charge. The flow of electrons is sometimes referred to as electronic flow.
Example 10.8 Calculating the Number of Electrons that Move through a Calculator
If the 0.300-mA current through the calculator mentioned in the Example 10.7 example is carried by electrons, how many
electrons per second pass through it?
Strategy
The current calculated in the previous example was defined for the flow of positive charge. For electrons, the magnitude is
the same, but the sign is opposite, Ielectrons = −0.300×10−3 C/s .Since each electron (e−) has a charge of
–1.60×10−19 C , we can convert the current in coulombs per second to electrons per second.
Solution
Starting with the definition of current, we have
(10.39)
Ielectrons = ΔQelectrons
Δt = –0.300×10−3 C
s .
We divide this by the charge per electron, so that
312 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12