negative charge.) The charges in this example are typical of common static electricity, and the modest attractive force
obtained is similar to forces experienced in static cling and similar situations.
10.4 Electric Field Lines
Drawings using lines to represent electric fields around charged objects are very useful in visualizing field strength and
direction. Since the electric field has both magnitude and direction, it is a vector. Like all vectors, the electric field can be
represented by an arrow that has length proportional to its magnitude and that points in the correct direction. (We have used
arrows extensively to represent force vectors, for example.)
Figure 10.13 shows two pictorial representations of the same electric field created by a positive point charge Q . Figure 10.13
(b) shows the standard representation using continuous lines. Figure 10.13 (a) shows numerous individual arrows with each
arrow representing the force on a test charge q .
Figure 10.13 Two equivalent representations of the electric field due to a positive charge Q . (a) Arrows representing the electric field’s magnitude
and direction. (b) In the standard representation, the arrows are replaced by continuous field lines having the same direction at any point as the electric
field. The closeness of the lines is directly related to the strength of the electric field. A test charge placed anywhere will feel a force in the direction of
the field line; this force will have a strength proportional to the density of the lines (being greater near the charge, for example).
Note that the electric field is defined for a positive test charge q , so that the field lines point away from a positive charge and
toward a negative charge. (See Figure 10.14.) The electric field strength is exactly proportional to the number of field lines per
unit area, since the magnitude of the electric field for a point charge is E = k|Q| / r2 and area is proportional to r2 . This
pictorial representation, in which field lines represent the direction and their closeness (that is, their areal density or the number
of lines crossing a unit area) represents strength, is used for all fields: electrostatic, gravitational, magnetic, and others.
Figure 10.14 The electric field surrounding three different point charges. (a) A positive charge. (b) A negative charge of equal magnitude. (c) A larger
negative charge.
In many situations, there are multiple charges. The total electric field created by multiple charges is the vector sum of the
individual fields created by each charge.
Figure 10.15 shows how the electric field from two point charges can be drawn by finding the total field at representative points
and drawing electric field lines consistent with those points. While the electric fields from multiple charges are more complex than
those of single charges, some simple features are easily noticed.
For example, the field is weaker between like charges, as shown by the lines being farther apart in that region. (This is because
the fields from each charge exert opposing forces on any charge placed between them.) (See Figure 10.15 and Figure
10.16(a).) Furthermore, at a great distance from two like charges, the field becomes identical to the field from a single, larger
charge.
Figure 10.16(b) shows the electric field of two unlike charges. The field is stronger between the charges. In that region, the fields
from each charge are in the same direction, and so their strengths add. The field of two unlike charges is weak at large
distances, because the fields of the individual charges are in opposite directions and so their strengths subtract. At very large
distances, the field of two unlike charges looks like that of a smaller single charge.
Chapter 10 | Electricity 297