Figure 10.35 A simple electric circuit in which a closed path for current to flow is supplied by conductors (usually metal wires) connecting a load to the
terminals of a battery, represented by the red parallel lines. The zigzag symbol represents the single resistor and includes any resistance in the
connections to the voltage source.
Example 10.9 Calculating Resistance: An Automobile Headlight
What is the resistance of an automobile headlight through which 2.50 A flows when 12.0 V is applied to it?
Strategy
We can rearrange Ohm’s law as stated by I = V/R and use it to find the resistance.
Solution
Rearranging I = V/R and substituting known values gives
(10.45)R = V
I = 12.0 V
2.50 A = 4.80 Ω.
Discussion
This is a relatively small resistance, but it is larger than the cold resistance of the headlight. Resistance usually increases
with temperature, and so the bulb has a lower resistance when it is first switched on and will draw considerably more current
during its brief warm-up period.
Resistances range over many orders of magnitude. Some ceramic insulators, such as those used to support power lines, have
resistances of 1012 Ω or more. A dry person may have a hand-to-foot resistance of 105 Ω , whereas the resistance of the
human heart is about 103 Ω . A meter-long piece of large-diameter copper wire may have a resistance of 10−5 Ω , and
superconductors have no resistance at all (they are non-ohmic). Resistance is related to the shape of an object and the material
of which it is composed.
Additional insight is gained by solving I = V/R for V, yielding
(10.46)V = IR.
This expression for V can be interpreted as the voltage drop across a resistor produced by the flow of current I . The phrase
IR drop is often used for this voltage. For instance, the headlight in Example 10.9 has an IR drop of 12.0 V. If voltage is
measured at various points in a circuit, it will be seen to increase at the voltage source and decrease at the resistor. Voltage is
similar to fluid pressure. The voltage source is like a pump, creating a pressure difference, causing current—the flow of charge.
The resistor is like a pipe that reduces pressure and limits flow because of its resistance. Conservation of energy has important
consequences here. The voltage source supplies energy (causing an electric field and a current), and the resistor converts it to
another form (such as thermal energy). In a simple circuit (one with a single simple resistor), the voltage supplied by the source
equals the voltage drop across the resistor, since PE = qΔV , and the same q flows through each. Thus the energy supplied
by the voltage source and the energy converted by the resistor are equal. (See Figure 10.36.)
Figure 10.36 The voltage drop across a resistor in a simple circuit equals the voltage output of the battery.
314 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12