hot water but increases the entropy of the cold water by a greater amount, producing an overall increase in entropy.
Second, once the two masses of water are mixed, there is only one temperature—you cannot run a heat engine with them. The
energy that could have been used to run a heat engine is now unavailable to do work.
Third, the mixture is less orderly, or to use another term, less structured. Rather than having two masses at different
temperatures and with different distributions of molecular speeds, we now have a single mass with a uniform temperature.
These three results—entropy, unavailability of energy, and disorder—are not only related but are in fact essentially equivalent.
9.13 Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of
Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation
Figure 9.52 When you toss a coin a large number of times, heads and tails tend to come up in roughly equal numbers. Why doesn’t heads come up
100, 90, or even 80% of the time? (credit: Jon Sullivan, PDPhoto.org)
The various ways of formulating the second law of thermodynamics tell what happens rather than why it happens. Why should
heat transfer occur only from hot to cold? Why should energy become ever less available to do work? Why should the universe
become increasingly disorderly? The answer is that it is a matter of overwhelming probability. Disorder is simply vastly more
likely than order.
When you watch an emerging rain storm begin to wet the ground, you will notice that the drops fall in a disorganized manner
both in time and in space. Some fall close together, some far apart, but they never fall in straight, orderly rows. It is not
impossible for rain to fall in an orderly pattern, just highly unlikely, because there are many more disorderly ways than orderly
ones. To illustrate this fact, we will examine some random processes, starting with coin tosses.
Coin Tosses
What are the possible outcomes of tossing 5 coins? Each coin can land either heads or tails. On the large scale, we are
concerned only with the total heads and tails and not with the order in which heads and tails appear. The following possibilities
exist:
(9.78)5 heads, 0 tails
4 heads, 1 tail
3 heads, 2 tails
2 heads, 3 tails
1 head, 4 tails
0 head, 5 tails
These are what we call macrostates. A macrostate is an overall property of a system. It does not specify the details of the
system, such as the order in which heads and tails occur or which coins are heads or tails.
Using this nomenclature, a system of 5 coins has the 6 possible macrostates just listed. Some macrostates are more likely to
occur than others. For instance, there is only one way to get 5 heads, but there are several ways to get 3 heads and 2 tails,
making the latter macrostate more probable. Table 9.4 lists of all the ways in which 5 coins can be tossed, taking into account
the order in which heads and tails occur. Each sequence is called a microstate—a detailed description of every element of a
system.
272 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12