Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
In a simple electrical circuit, the sole resistor converts energy supplied by the source into another form. Conservation of
energy is evidenced here by the fact that all of the energy supplied by the source is converted to another form by the resistor
alone. We will find that conservation of energy has other important applications in circuits and is a powerful tool in circuit
analysis.
10.9 Electric Power and Energy
Power in Electric Circuits
Power is associated by many people with electricity. Knowing that power is the rate of energy use or energy conversion, what is
the expression for electric power? Power transmission lines might come to mind. We also think of lightbulbs in terms of their
power ratings in watts. Let us compare a 25-W bulb with a 60-W bulb. (See Figure 10.37(a).) Since both operate on the same
voltage, the 60-W bulb must draw more current to have a greater power rating. Thus the 60-W bulb’s resistance must be lower
than that of a 25-W bulb. If we increase voltage, we also increase power. For example, when a 25-W bulb that is designed to
operate on 120 V is connected to 240 V, it briefly glows very brightly and then burns out. Precisely how are voltage, current, and
resistance related to electric power?
Figure 10.37 (a) Which of these lightbulbs, the 25-W bulb (upper left) or the 60-W bulb (upper right), has the higher resistance? Which draws more
current? Which uses the most energy? Can you tell from the color that the 25-W filament is cooler? Is the brighter bulb a different color and if so why?
(credits: Dickbauch, Wikimedia Commons; Greg Westfall, Flickr) (b) This compact fluorescent light (CFL) puts out the same intensity of light as the
60-W bulb, but at 1/4 to 1/10 the input power. (credit: dbgg1979, Flickr)
Electric energy depends on both the voltage involved and the charge moved. This is expressed most simply as PE = qV ,
where q is the charge moved and V is the voltage (or more precisely, the potential difference the charge moves through).
Power is the rate at which energy is moved, and so electric power is
(10.47)P = PE
t = qV
t .
Recognizing that current is I = q / t (note that Δt = t here), the expression for power becomes
(10.48)P = IV.
Electric power ( P ) is simply the product of current times voltage. Power has familiar units of watts. Since the SI unit for potential
energy (PE) is the joule, power has units of joules per second, or watts. Thus, 1 A ⋅ V = 1 W . For example, cars often have
one or more auxiliary power outlets with which you can charge a cell phone or other electronic devices. These outlets may be
rated at 20 A, so that the circuit can deliver a maximum power P = IV = (20 A)(12 V) = 240 W . In some applications,
electric power may be expressed as volt-amperes or even kilovolt-amperes ( 1 kA ⋅ V = 1 kW ).
To see the relationship of power to resistance, we combine Ohm’s law with P = IV . Substituting I = V/R gives
P = (V / R)V = V 2 /R . Similarly, substituting V = IR gives P = I(IR) = I 2R . Three expressions for electric power are
Chapter 10 | Electricity 315