absolute zero:
adiabatic process:
Boltzmann constant:
Carnot cycle:
Carnot efficiency:
Carnot engine:
Celsius scale:
change in entropy:
coefficient of performance:
conduction:
Solution
The change in entropy is
(9.80)ΔS = Sf – Si = klnWf – klnWi,
where the subscript i stands for the initial 60 heads and 40 tails state, and the subscript f for the final 50 heads and 50 tails
state. Substituting the values for W from Table 9.5 gives
(9.81)ΔS = (1.38×10 – 23 J/K)[ln(1.0×1029 ) – ln(1.4×1028)]
= 2.7×10 – 23 J/K
Discussion
This increase in entropy means we have moved to a less orderly situation. It is not impossible for further tosses to produce
the initial state of 60 heads and 40 tails, but it is less likely. There is about a 1 in 90 chance for that decrease in entropy (
– 2.7×10 – 23 J/K ) to occur. If we calculate the decrease in entropy to move to the most orderly state, we get
ΔS = – 92×10 – 23 J/K . There is about a 1 in 1030 chance of this change occurring. So while very small decreases in
entropy are unlikely, slightly greater decreases are impossibly unlikely. These probabilities imply, again, that for a
macroscopic system, a decrease in entropy is impossible. For example, for heat transfer to occur spontaneously from 1.00
kg of 0ºC ice to its 0ºC environment, there would be a decrease in entropy of 1.22×103 J/K . Given that a
ΔS of 10 – 21 J/K corresponds to about a 1 in 1030 chance, a decrease of this size ( 103 J/K ) is an utter impossibility.
Even for a milligram of melted ice to spontaneously refreeze is impossible.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Entropy
1. Examine the situation to determine if entropy is involved.
2. Identify the system of interest and draw a labeled diagram of the system showing energy flow.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). You must carefully
identify the heat transfer, if any, and the temperature at which the process takes place. It is also important to identify
the initial and final states.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown). Note that the change in entropy can
be determined between any states by calculating it for a reversible process.
6. Substitute the known value along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerical solutions
complete with units.
7. To see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense? For example, total entropy should increase for any real process or be
constant for a reversible process. Disordered states should be more probable and have greater entropy than ordered
states.
Glossary
the lowest possible temperature; the temperature at which all molecular motion ceases
a process in which no heat transfer takes place
k , a physical constant that relates energy to temperature; k = 1.38×10–23 J/K
a cyclical process that uses only reversible processes, the adiabatic and isothermal processes
the maximum theoretical efficiency for a heat engine
a heat engine that uses a Carnot cycle
temperature scale in which the freezing point of water is 0ºC and the boiling point of water is 100ºC
the ratio of heat transfer to temperature Q / T
for a heat pump, it is the ratio of heat transfer at the output (the hot reservoir) to the work
supplied; for a refrigerator or air conditioner, it is the ratio of heat transfer from the cold reservoir to the work supplied
heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact
276 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12