5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).
6. Substitute the known quantities along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions
complete with units.
7. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense? For example, efficiency is always less than 1,
whereas coefficients of performance are greater than 1.
9.12 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the
Unavailability of Energy
Figure 9.48 The ice in this drink is slowly melting. Eventually the liquid will reach thermal equilibrium, as predicted by the second law of
thermodynamics. (credit: Jon Sullivan, PDPhoto.org)
There is yet another way of expressing the second law of thermodynamics. This version relates to a concept called entropy. By
examining it, we shall see that the directions associated with the second law—heat transfer from hot to cold, for example—are
related to the tendency in nature for systems to become disordered and for less energy to be available for use as work. The
entropy of a system can in fact be shown to be a measure of its disorder and of the unavailability of energy to do work.
Making Connections: Entropy, Energy, and Work
Recall that the simple definition of energy is the ability to do work. Entropy is a measure of how much energy is not available
to do work. Although all forms of energy are interconvertible, and all can be used to do work, it is not always possible, even
in principle, to convert the entire available energy into work. That unavailable energy is of interest in thermodynamics,
because the field of thermodynamics arose from efforts to convert heat to work.
We can see how entropy is defined by recalling our discussion of the Carnot engine. We noted that for a Carnot cycle, and hence
for any reversible processes, Qc / Qh = Tc / Th . Rearranging terms yields
(9.66)Qc
Tc
= Qh
Th
for any reversible process. Qc and Qh are absolute values of the heat transfer at temperatures Tc and Th , respectively. This
ratio of Q / T is defined to be the change in entropy ΔS for a reversible process,
(9.67)ΔS = ⎛
⎝
Q
T
⎞
⎠rev,
where Q is the heat transfer, which is positive for heat transfer into and negative for heat transfer out of, and T is the absolute
temperature at which the reversible process takes place. The SI unit for entropy is joules per kelvin (J/K). If temperature changes
during the process, then it is usually a good approximation (for small changes in temperature) to take T to be the average
temperature, avoiding the need to use integral calculus to find ΔS .
The definition of ΔS is strictly valid only for reversible processes, such as used in a Carnot engine. However, we can find ΔS
precisely even for real, irreversible processes. The reason is that the entropy S of a system, like internal energy U , depends
268 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12