Figure 9.33 (a) Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from a hot object to a cold one, consistent with the second law of thermodynamics. (b) A heat
engine, represented here by a circle, uses part of the heat transfer to do work. The hot and cold objects are called the hot and cold reservoirs. Qh is
the heat transfer out of the hot reservoir, W is the work output, and Qc is the heat transfer into the cold reservoir.
Because the hot reservoir is heated externally, which is energy intensive, it is important that the work is done as efficiently as
possible. In fact, we would like W to equal Qh , and for there to be no heat transfer to the environment ( Qc = 0 ).
Unfortunately, this is impossible. The second law of thermodynamics also states, with regard to using heat transfer to do work
(the second expression of the second law):
The Second Law of Thermodynamics (second expression)
It is impossible in any system for heat transfer from a reservoir to completely convert to work in a cyclical process in which
the system returns to its initial state.
A cyclical process brings a system, such as the gas in a cylinder, back to its original state at the end of every cycle. Most heat
engines, such as reciprocating piston engines and rotating turbines, use cyclical processes. The second law, just stated in its
second form, clearly states that such engines cannot have perfect conversion of heat transfer into work done. Before going into
the underlying reasons for the limits on converting heat transfer into work, we need to explore the relationships among W , Qh ,
and Qc , and to define the efficiency of a cyclical heat engine. As noted, a cyclical process brings the system back to its original
condition at the end of every cycle. Such a system’s internal energy U is the same at the beginning and end of every
cycle—that is, ΔU = 0 . The first law of thermodynamics states that
(9.42)ΔU = Q − W,
where Q is the net heat transfer during the cycle ( Q = Qh − Qc ) and W is the net work done by the system. Since
ΔU = 0 for a complete cycle, we have
(9.43)0 = Q − W,
so that
(9.44)W = Q.
Thus the net work done by the system equals the net heat transfer into the system, or
(9.45)W = Qh − Qc (cyclical process),
just as shown schematically in Figure 9.33(b). The problem is that in all processes, there is some heat transfer Qc to the
environment—and usually a very significant amount at that.
In the conversion of energy to work, we are always faced with the problem of getting less out than we put in. We define
conversion efficiency Eff to be the ratio of useful work output to the energy input (or, in other words, the ratio of what we get to
what we spend). In that spirit, we define the efficiency of a heat engine to be its net work output W divided by heat transfer to
the engine Qh ; that is,
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 255