The most likely conditions (or macrostates) for a gas are those we see all the time—a random distribution of atoms in space with
a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of speeds in random directions, as predicted by kinetic theory. This is the most disorderly and
least structured condition we can imagine. In contrast, one type of very orderly and structured macrostate has all of the atoms in
one corner of a container with identical velocities. There are very few ways to accomplish this (very few microstates
corresponding to it), and so it is exceedingly unlikely ever to occur. (See Figure 9.53(b).) Indeed, it is so unlikely that we have a
law saying that it is impossible, which has never been observed to be violated—the second law of thermodynamics.
Figure 9.53 (a) The ordinary state of gas in a container is a disorderly, random distribution of atoms or molecules with a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
of speeds. It is so unlikely that these atoms or molecules would ever end up in one corner of the container that it might as well be impossible. (b) With
energy transfer, the gas can be forced into one corner and its entropy greatly reduced. But left alone, it will spontaneously increase its entropy and
return to the normal conditions, because they are immensely more likely.
The disordered condition is one of high entropy, and the ordered one has low entropy. With a transfer of energy from another
system, we could force all of the atoms into one corner and have a local decrease in entropy, but at the cost of an overall
increase in entropy of the universe. If the atoms start out in one corner, they will quickly disperse and become uniformly
distributed and will never return to the orderly original state (Figure 9.53(b)). Entropy will increase. With such a large sample of
atoms, it is possible—but unimaginably unlikely—for entropy to decrease. Disorder is vastly more likely than order.
The arguments that disorder and high entropy are the most probable states are quite convincing. The great Austrian physicist
Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906)—who, along with Maxwell, made so many contributions to kinetic theory—proved that the
entropy of a system in a given state (a macrostate) can be written as
(9.79)S = klnW,
where k = 1.38×10−23 J/K is Boltzmann’s constant, and lnW is the natural logarithm of the number of microstates W
corresponding to the given macrostate. W is proportional to the probability that the macrostate will occur. Thus entropy is
directly related to the probability of a state—the more likely the state, the greater its entropy. Boltzmann proved that this
expression for S is equivalent to the definition ΔS = Q / T , which we have used extensively.
Thus the second law of thermodynamics is explained on a very basic level: entropy either remains the same or increases in
every process. This phenomenon is due to the extraordinarily small probability of a decrease, based on the extraordinarily larger
number of microstates in systems with greater entropy. Entropy can decrease, but for any macroscopic system, this outcome is
so unlikely that it will never be observed.
Example 9.12 Entropy Increases in a Coin Toss
Suppose you toss 100 coins starting with 60 heads and 40 tails, and you get the most likely result, 50 heads and 50 tails.
What is the change in entropy?
Strategy
Noting that the number of microstates is labeled W in Table 9.5 for the 100-coin toss, we can use
ΔS = Sf − Si = klnWf - klnWi to calculate the change in entropy.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 275