The adiabatic process is, in some sense, the opposite of an isothermal process. In an adiabatic process, no heat transfer takes
place (that is, Q = 0 ). This may happen because the gas is well-insulated from the surrounding. It may also happen because
the process occurs so quickly that no significant heat transfer can take place. In an adiabatic expansion, for example, the internal
energy of the gas decreases, because of the work done by the gas in expansion. This is perhaps the clearest experimental
evidence one can observe that it takes work for a gas to expand under pressure.
Figure 9.30 illustrates these three processes on a plot of pressure and volume (a PV diagram). In an isothermal process, as
the gas expands, the pressure decreases. This can be predicted from the ideal gas law ( PV = NkT ). Since the temperature is
constant, if volume increases, the pressure must decrease, to keep PV constant. You can also see that in an adiabatic process,
the pressure decreases with expanding volume more steeply than an isothermal process, because in an adiabatic process, the
temperature is not constant, but it decreases. So with increasing V , the pressure decrease even more rapidly, so that PV
actually decreases (for decreasing temperature).
Figure 9.30 (a) The upper curve is an isothermal process ( ΔT = 0 ), whereas the lower curve is an adiabatic process ( Q = 0 ). Both start from
the same point A, but the isothermal process does more work than the adiabatic because heat transfer into the gas takes place to keep its temperature
constant. This keeps the pressure higher all along the isothermal path than along the adiabatic path, producing more work. The adiabatic path thus
ends up with a lower pressure and temperature at point C, even though the final volume is the same as for the isothermal process. (b) The cycle ABCA
produces a net work output.
Reversible Processes
Both isothermal and adiabatic processes such as shown in Figure 9.30 are reversible in principle. A reversible process is one
in which both the system and its environment can return to exactly the states they were in by following the reverse path. The
reverse isothermal and adiabatic paths are BA and CA, respectively. Real macroscopic processes are never exactly reversible.
In the previous examples, our system is a gas (like that in Figure 9.29), and its environment is the piston, cylinder, and the rest
of the universe. If there are any energy-dissipating mechanisms, such as friction or turbulence, then heat transfer to the
environment occurs for either direction of the piston. So, for example, if the path BA is followed and there is friction, then the gas
will be returned to its original state but the environment will not—it will have been heated in both directions. Reversibility requires
the direction of heat transfer to reverse for the reverse path. Since dissipative mechanisms cannot be completely eliminated, real
processes cannot be reversible.
There must be reasons that real macroscopic processes cannot be reversible. We can imagine them going in reverse. For
example, heat transfer occurs spontaneously from hot to cold and never spontaneously the reverse. Yet it would not violate the
first law of thermodynamics for this to happen. In fact, all spontaneous processes, such as bubbles bursting, never go in reverse.
There is a second thermodynamic law that forbids them from going in reverse. When we study this law, we will learn something
about nature and also find that such a law limits the efficiency of heat engines. We will find that heat engines with the greatest
possible theoretical efficiency would have to use reversible processes, and even they cannot convert all heat transfer into doing
work. Table 9.3 summarizes the simpler thermodynamic processes and their definitions.
252 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12