Figure 10.26 (a) A lightning rod is pointed to facilitate the transfer of charge. (credit: Romaine, Wikimedia Commons) (b) This Van de Graaff generator
has a smooth surface with a large radius of curvature to prevent the transfer of charge and allow a large voltage to be generated. The mutual repulsion
of like charges is evident in the person’s hair while touching the metal sphere. (credit: Jon ‘ShakataGaNai’ Davis/Wikimedia Commons).
Below are additional applications of electrostatics, the study of electricity in electrostatic equilibrium, many of them using
conductors for their properties just discussed above.
The Van de Graaff Generator
Van de Graaff generators (or Van de Graaffs) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage due to static
electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931 (based on original
suggestions by Lord Kelvin) for use in nuclear physics research. Figure 10.27 shows a schematic of a large research version.
Van de Graaffs utilize both smooth and pointed surfaces, and conductors and insulators to generate large static charges and,
hence, large voltages.
A very large excess charge can be deposited on the sphere, because it moves quickly to the outer surface. Practical limits arise
because the large electric fields polarize and eventually ionize surrounding materials, creating free charges that neutralize
excess charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within practical limits.
Figure 10.27 Schematic of Van de Graaff generator. A battery (A) supplies excess positive charge to a pointed conductor, the points of which spray the
charge onto a moving insulating belt near the bottom. The pointed conductor (B) on top in the large sphere picks up the charge. (The induced electric
field at the points is so large that it removes the charge from the belt.) This can be done because the charge does not remain inside the conducting
sphere but moves to its outside surface. An ion source inside the sphere produces positive ions, which are accelerated away from the positive sphere
to high velocities.
Take-Home Experiment: Electrostatics and Humidity
Rub a comb through your hair and use it to lift pieces of paper. It may help to tear the pieces of paper rather than cut them
neatly. Repeat the exercise in your bathroom after you have had a long shower and the air in the bathroom is moist. Is it
easier to get electrostatic effects in dry or moist air? Why would torn paper be more attractive to the comb than cut paper?
Chapter 10 | Electricity 307