(10.10)F
FG
= 2.27×1039.
Discussion
This is a remarkably large ratio! Note that this will be the ratio of electrostatic force to gravitational force for an electron and a
proton at any distance (taking the ratio before entering numerical values shows that the distance cancels). This ratio gives
some indication of just how much larger the Coulomb force is than the gravitational force between two of the most common
particles in nature.
As the example implies, gravitational force is completely negligible on a small scale, where the interactions of individual charged
particles are important. On a large scale, such as between the Earth and a person, the reverse is true. Most objects are nearly
electrically neutral, and so attractive and repulsive Coulomb forces nearly cancel. Gravitational force on a large scale
dominates interactions between large objects because it is always attractive, while Coulomb forces tend to cancel.
10.3 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited
Contact forces, such as between a baseball and a bat, are explained on the small scale by the interaction of the charges in
atoms and molecules in close proximity. They interact through forces that include the Coulomb force. Action at a distance is a
force between objects that are not close enough for their atoms to “touch.” That is, they are separated by more than a few atomic
diameters.
For example, a charged rubber comb attracts neutral bits of paper from a distance via the Coulomb force. It is very useful to think
of an object being surrounded in space by a force field. The force field carries the force to another object (called a test object)
some distance away.
Concept of a Field
A field is a way of conceptualizing and mapping the force that surrounds any object and acts on another object at a distance
without apparent physical connection. For example, the gravitational field surrounding the earth (and all other masses)
represents the gravitational force that would be experienced if another mass were placed at a given point within the field.
In the same way, the Coulomb force field surrounding any charge extends throughout space. Using Coulomb’s law,
F = k|q1q2| / r2 , its magnitude is given by the equation F = k|qQ| / r2 , for a point charge (a particle having a charge Q )
acting on a test charge q at a distance r (see Figure 10.12). Both the magnitude and direction of the Coulomb force field
depend on Q and the test charge q .
Figure 10.12 The Coulomb force field due to a positive charge Q is shown acting on two different charges. Both charges are the same distance from
Q . (a) Since q1 is positive, the force F1 acting on it is repulsive. (b) The charge q2 is negative and greater in magnitude than q1 , and so the
force F2 acting on it is attractive and stronger than F1 . The Coulomb force field is thus not unique at any point in space, because it depends on the
test charges q1 and q2 as well as the charge Q .
To simplify things, we would prefer to have a field that depends only on Q and not on the test charge q . The electric field is
defined in such a manner that it represents only the charge creating it and is unique at every point in space. Specifically, the
electric field E is defined to be the ratio of the Coulomb force to the test charge:
(10.11)E = F
q ,
where F is the electrostatic force (or Coulomb force) exerted on a positive test charge q . It is understood that E is in the
Chapter 10 | Electricity 295