41. Why—other than the fact that the second law of thermodynamics says reversible engines are the most efficient—should heat
engines employing reversible processes be more efficient than those employing irreversible processes? Consider that dissipative
mechanisms are one cause of irreversibility.
9.10 Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated
42. Think about the drinking bird at the beginning of this section (Figure 9.37). Although the bird enjoys the theoretical maximum
efficiency possible, if left to its own devices over time, the bird will cease “drinking.” What are some of the dissipative processes
that might cause the bird’s motion to cease?
43. Can improved engineering and materials be employed in heat engines to reduce heat transfer into the environment? Can
they eliminate heat transfer into the environment entirely?
44. Does the second law of thermodynamics alter the conservation of energy principle?
9.11 Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators
45. Explain why heat pumps do not work as well in very cold climates as they do in milder ones. Is the same true of
refrigerators?
46. In some Northern European nations, homes are being built without heating systems of any type. They are very well insulated
and are kept warm by the body heat of the residents. However, when the residents are not at home, it is still warm in these
houses. What is a possible explanation?
47. Why do refrigerators, air conditioners, and heat pumps operate most cost-effectively for cycles with a small difference
between Th and Tc ? (Note that the temperatures of the cycle employed are crucial to its COP .)
48. Grocery store managers contend that there is less total energy consumption in the summer if the store is kept at a low
temperature. Make arguments to support or refute this claim, taking into account that there are numerous refrigerators and
freezers in the store.
49. Can you cool a kitchen by leaving the refrigerator door open?
9.12 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy
50. Does a gas become more orderly when it liquefies? Does its entropy change? If so, does the entropy increase or decrease?
Explain your answer.
51. Explain how water’s entropy can decrease when it freezes without violating the second law of thermodynamics. Specifically,
explain what happens to the entropy of its surroundings.
52. Is a uniform-temperature gas more or less orderly than one with several different temperatures? Which is more structured? In
which can heat transfer result in work done without heat transfer from another system?
53. Give an example of a spontaneous process in which a system becomes less ordered and energy becomes less available to
do work. What happens to the system’s entropy in this process?
54. What is the change in entropy in an adiabatic process? Does this imply that adiabatic processes are reversible? Can a
process be precisely adiabatic for a macroscopic system?
55. Does the entropy of a star increase or decrease as it radiates? Does the entropy of the space into which it radiates (which
has a temperature of about 3 K) increase or decrease? What does this do to the entropy of the universe?
56. Explain why a building made of bricks has smaller entropy than the same bricks in a disorganized pile. Do this by considering
the number of ways that each could be formed (the number of microstates in each macrostate).
9.13 Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying
Explanation
57. Explain why a building made of bricks has smaller entropy than the same bricks in a disorganized pile. Do this by considering
the number of ways that each could be formed (the number of microstates in each macrostate).
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 283