Electric Potential
Electric potential is the electric potential energy per unit charge.
(10.17)V = PE
q
With potential energy, the case often is that its value at a single point has no significant meaning but what is important is the
difference in potential energy. From the difference in potential energy, we are able to calculate other quantities, such as change
in kinetic energy (if no force other than the conservative force acts) or work needing to be done by other forces (if other forces
act). So likewise, rather than the electric potential itself, we are often interested in difference in electric potential ΔV between
two points, where,
(10.18)ΔV = VB − VA = ΔPE
q .
The potential difference between points A and B, VB – VA , is thus defined to be the change in potential energy of a charge
q moved from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb, given the name volt (V) after
Alessandro Volta.
(10.19)1 V = 1 J
C
Potential Difference
The potential difference between points A and B, VB - VA , is defined to be the change in potential energy of a charge q
moved from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb, given the name volt (V) after
Alessandro Volta.
(10.20)1 V = 1 J
C
The familiar term voltage is the common name for potential difference. Keep in mind that whenever a voltage is quoted, it is
understood to be the potential difference between two points. For example, every battery has two terminals, and its voltage is the
potential difference between them. More fundamentally, the point you choose to be zero volts is arbitrary. This is analogous to
the fact that gravitational potential energy has an arbitrary zero, such as sea level or perhaps a lecture hall floor.
In summary, the relationship between potential difference (or voltage) and electrical potential energy is given by
(10.21)ΔV = ΔPE
q and ΔPE = qΔV.
Potential Difference and Electrical Potential Energy
The relationship between potential difference (or voltage) and electrical potential energy is given by
(10.22)ΔV = ΔPE
q and ΔPE = qΔV.
The second equation is equivalent to the first.
Voltage is not the same as energy. Voltage is the energy per unit charge. Thus a motorcycle battery and a car battery can both
have the same voltage (more precisely, the same potential difference between battery terminals), yet one stores much more
energy than the other since ΔPE = qΔV . The car battery can move more charge than the motorcycle battery, although both
are 12 V batteries.
Example 10.4 Calculating Energy
Suppose you have a 12.0 V motorcycle battery that can move 5000 C of charge, and a 12.0 V car battery that can move
60,000 C of charge. How much energy does each deliver? (Assume that the numerical value of each charge is accurate to
three significant figures.)
Strategy
To say we have a 12.0 V battery means that its terminals have a 12.0 V potential difference. When such a battery moves
charge, it puts the charge through a potential difference of 12.0 V, and the charge is given a change in potential energy
equal to ΔPE = qΔV .
So to find the energy output, we multiply the charge moved by the potential difference.
Solution
300 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12