Figure 9.12 (a) When air is pumped into a deflated tire, its volume first increases without much increase in pressure. (b) When the tire is filled to a
certain point, the tire walls resist further expansion and the pressure increases with more air. (c) Once the tire is inflated, its pressure increases with
temperature.
At room temperatures, collisions between atoms and molecules can be ignored. In this case, the gas is called an ideal gas, in
which case the relationship between the pressure, volume, and temperature is given by the equation of state called the ideal gas
law.
Ideal Gas Law
The ideal gas law states that
(9.1)PV = NkT,
where P is the absolute pressure of a gas, V is the volume it occupies, N is the number of atoms and molecules in the
gas, and T is its absolute temperature. The constant k is called the Boltzmann constant in honor of Austrian physicist
Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906) and has the value
(9.2)k = 1.38×10−23 J / K.
The ideal gas law can be derived from basic principles, but was originally deduced from experimental measurements of Charles’
law (that volume occupied by a gas is proportional to temperature at a fixed pressure) and from Boyle’s law (that for a fixed
temperature, the product PV is a constant). In the ideal gas model, the volume occupied by its atoms and molecules is a
negligible fraction of V . The ideal gas law describes the behavior of real gases under most conditions. (Note, for example, that
N is the total number of atoms and molecules, independent of the type of gas.)
Let us see how the ideal gas law is consistent with the behavior of filling the tire when it is pumped slowly and the temperature is
constant. At first, the pressure P is essentially equal to atmospheric pressure, and the volume V increases in direct proportion
to the number of atoms and molecules N put into the tire. Once the volume of the tire is constant, the equation PV = NkT
predicts that the pressure should increase in proportion to the number N of atoms and molecules.
Example 9.1 Calculating Pressure Changes Due to Temperature Changes: Tire Pressure
Suppose your bicycle tire is fully inflated, with an absolute pressure of 7.00×105 Pa (a gauge pressure of just under
90.0 lb/in2 ) at a temperature of 18.0ºC . What is the pressure after its temperature has risen to 35.0ºC ? Assume that
there are no appreciable leaks or changes in volume.
Strategy
The pressure in the tire is changing only because of changes in temperature. First we need to identify what we know and
what we want to know, and then identify an equation to solve for the unknown.
We know the initial pressure P0 = 7.00×105 Pa , the initial temperature T0 = 18.0ºC , and the final temperature
Tf = 35.0ºC . We must find the final pressure Pf . How can we use the equation PV = NkT ? At first, it may seem that
not enough information is given, because the volume V and number of atoms N are not specified. What we can do is use
the equation twice: P0 V0 = NkT0 and Pf Vf = NkTf . If we divide Pf Vf by P0 V0 we can come up with an equation
that allows us to solve for Pf .
(9.3)Pf Vf
P0 V0
= Nf kTf
N0 kT0
Since the volume is constant, Vf and V0 are the same and they cancel out. The same is true for Nf and N0 , and k ,
which is a constant. Therefore,
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 231