Figure 10.8 When materials are rubbed together, charges can be separated, particularly if one material has a greater affinity for electrons than another.
(a) Both the amber and cloth are originally neutral, with equal positive and negative charges. Only a tiny fraction of the charges are involved, and only a
few of them are shown here. (b) When rubbed together, some negative charge is transferred to the amber, leaving the cloth with a net positive charge.
(c) When separated, the amber and cloth now have net charges, but the absolute value of the net positive and negative charges will be equal.
No charge is actually created or destroyed when charges are separated as we have been discussing. Rather, existing charges
are moved about. In fact, in all situations the total amount of charge is always constant. This universally obeyed law of nature is
called the law of conservation of charge.
Law of Conservation of Charge
Total charge is constant in any process.
In more exotic situations, such as in particle accelerators, mass, Δm , can be created from energy in the amount Δm = E
c2 .
Sometimes, the created mass is charged, such as when an electron is created. Whenever a charged particle is created, another
having an opposite charge is always created along with it, so that the total charge created is zero. Usually, the two particles are
“matter-antimatter” counterparts. For example, an antielectron would usually be created at the same time as an electron. The
antielectron has a positive charge (it is called a positron), and so the total charge created is zero. (See Figure 10.9.) All particles
have antimatter counterparts with opposite signs. When matter and antimatter counterparts are brought together, they completely
annihilate one another. By annihilate, we mean that the mass of the two particles is converted to energy E, again obeying the
relationship Δm = E
c2 . Since the two particles have equal and opposite charge, the total charge is zero before and after the
annihilation; thus, total charge is conserved.
Making Connections: Conservation Laws
Only a limited number of physical quantities are universally conserved. Charge is one—energy, momentum, and angular
momentum are others. Because they are conserved, these physical quantities are used to explain more phenomena and
form more connections than other, less basic quantities. We find that conserved quantities give us great insight into the rules
followed by nature and hints to the organization of nature. Discoveries of conservation laws have led to further discoveries,
such as the weak nuclear force and the quark substructure of protons and other particles.
292 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12