Connections: Energy Units
The electron volt (eV) is the most common energy unit for submicroscopic processes. This will be particularly noticeable in
the chapters on modern physics. Energy is so important to so many subjects that there is a tendency to define a special
energy unit for each major topic. There are, for example, calories for food energy, and kilowatt-hours for electrical energy.
The electron volt is commonly employed in submicroscopic processes—chemical valence energies and molecular and nuclear
binding energies are among the quantities often expressed in electron volts. For example, about 5 eV of energy is required to
break up certain organic molecules. If a proton is accelerated from rest through a potential difference of 30 kV, it is given an
energy of 30 keV (30,000 eV) and it can break up as many as 6000 of these molecules (
30,000 eV ÷ 5 eV per molecule = 6000 molecules ). Nuclear decay energies are on the order of 1 MeV (1,000,000 eV) per
event and can, thus, produce significant biological damage.
Conservation of Energy
The total energy of a system is conserved if there is no net addition (or subtraction) of work or heat transfer. For conservative
forces, such as the electrostatic force, conservation of energy states that mechanical energy is a constant.
Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a system; that is, KE + PE = constant . A loss of
PE of a charged particle becomes an increase in its KE. Here PE is the electric potential energy. Conservation of energy is stated
in equation form as
(10.29)KE + PE = constant
or
(10.30)KEi + PEi= KEf + PEf ,
where i and f stand for initial and final conditions. As we have found many times before, considering energy can give us insights
and facilitate problem solving.
Example 10.6 Electrical Potential Energy Converted to Kinetic Energy
Calculate the final speed of a free electron accelerated from rest through a potential difference of 100 V. (Assume that this
numerical value is accurate to three significant figures.)
Strategy
We have a system with only conservative forces. Assuming the electron is accelerated in a vacuum, and neglecting the
gravitational force (we will check on this assumption later), all of the electrical potential energy is converted into kinetic
energy. We can identify the initial and final forms of energy to be KEi = 0, KEf = ½mv2, PEi = qV, and PEf = 0.
Solution
Conservation of energy states that
(10.31)KEi + PEi= KEf + PEf.
Entering the forms identified above, we obtain
(10.32)
qV = mv2
2 .
We solve this for v :
(10.33)
v = 2qV
m .
Entering values for q, V, and m gives
(10.34)
v =
2⎛
⎝–1.60×10–19 C⎞
⎠(–100 J/C)
9.11×10–31 kg
= 5.93×106 m/s.
Discussion
Note that both the charge and the initial voltage are negative, as in Figure 10.19. We know that electrostatic forces on small
particles are generally very large compared with the gravitational force. The large final speed confirms that the gravitational
force is indeed negligible here. The large speed also indicates how easy it is to accelerate electrons with small voltages
because of their very small mass. Voltages much higher than the 100 V in this problem are typically used in electron guns.
Chapter 10 | Electricity 303