We now calculate the two changes in entropy using ΔStot = ΔSh + ΔSc . First, for the heat transfer from the hot reservoir,
(9.70)
ΔSh = −Qh
Th
= −4000 J
600 K = – 6.67 J/K.
And for the cold reservoir,
(9.71)ΔSc = Qc
Tc
= 4000 J
250 K = 16.0 J/K.
Thus the total is
(9.72)ΔStot = ΔSh + ΔSc
= ( – 6.67 +16.0) J/K
= 9.33 J/K.
Discussion
There is an increase in entropy for the system of two heat reservoirs undergoing this irreversible heat transfer. We will see
that this means there is a loss of ability to do work with this transferred energy. Entropy has increased, and energy has
become unavailable to do work.
Figure 9.50 (a) Heat transfer from a hot object to a cold one is an irreversible process that produces an overall increase in entropy. (b) The same
final state and, thus, the same change in entropy is achieved for the objects if reversible heat transfer processes occur between the two objects
whose temperatures are the same as the temperatures of the corresponding objects in the irreversible process.
It is reasonable that entropy increases for heat transfer from hot to cold. Since the change in entropy is Q / T , there is a larger
change at lower temperatures. The decrease in entropy of the hot object is therefore less than the increase in entropy of the cold
object, producing an overall increase, just as in the previous example. This result is very general:
There is an increase in entropy for any system undergoing an irreversible process.
With respect to entropy, there are only two possibilities: entropy is constant for a reversible process, and it increases for an
irreversible process. There is a fourth version of the second law of thermodynamics stated in terms of entropy:
The total entropy of a system either increases or remains constant in any process; it never decreases.
For example, heat transfer cannot occur spontaneously from cold to hot, because entropy would decrease.
Entropy is very different from energy. Entropy is not conserved but increases in all real processes. Reversible processes (such
as in Carnot engines) are the processes in which the most heat transfer to work takes place and are also the ones that keep
entropy constant. Thus we are led to make a connection between entropy and the availability of energy to do work.
Order to Disorder
Entropy is related not only to the unavailability of energy to do work—it is also a measure of disorder. This notion was initially
270 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12