Figure 9.29 An isobaric expansion of a gas requires heat transfer to keep the pressure constant. Since pressure is constant, the work done is PΔV .
Recall from mechanics that work done by a force F on an object undergoing displacement d is
(9.39)W = Fd.
See the symbols as shown in Figure 9.29. Now force is pressure times area ( F = PA ), and so
(9.40)W = PAd.
Because the volume of a cylinder is its cross-sectional area A times its length d , we see that Ad = ΔV , the change in
volume; thus,
(9.41)W = PΔV (isobaric process).
Note that if ΔV is positive, then W is positive, meaning that positive work is done by the gas on the outside world.
(Note that the pressure involved in this work that we’ve called P is the pressure of the gas inside the tank. If we call the
pressure outside the tank Pext , an expanding gas would be working against the external pressure; the work done would
therefore be W = −PextΔV (isobaric process). There are some—especially chemists—who use this definition of work, and not
the definition based on internal pressure, as the basis of the First Law of Thermodynamics. This definition reverses the sign
conventions for work, and results in a statement of the first law that becomes ΔU = Q + W . In this textbook, we will use the
physics convention of using work done by the system on the surrounding, not the other way around.)
This is the key lesson from the above derivation: a gas expanding under pressure does work on its surrounding, and unless
additional energy is added through heat transfer, the internal energy of the gas decreases. We will examine the experimental
results that come about as a consequence of this fact later.
Thermodynamic Processes
We introduced the isobaric process above in discussing work done by a gas. Isobaric process is an example of a
thermodynamic process. A thermodynamic process describes a change that happens to a gas, which results in change in its
pressure ( P ), volume ( V ), and/or temperature ( T ). An isobaric process is a thermodynamic process that takes place under
constant pressure (so the volume and temperature of the gas may change in an isobaric process).
There are three more named thermodynamic processes. These processes are given special names because, like the isobaric
process, they occur under some restrictions, which gives them their special properties, as described briefly below. These three
additional named thermodynamic processes are: isochoric, isothermal, and adiabatic processes.
An isochoric process is a thermodynamic process in which no change in volume takes place. Because the work done by a gas
is proportional to the change in volume, in an isochoric process, no work is done by (or on) the gas. Instead, in an isochoric
process, a heat transfer takes place, and the energy from the heat transfer goes into increasing (or decreasing) the internal
energy of the gas, increasing (or decreasing) its temperature.
An isothermal process is a thermodynamic process in which no change in temperature takes place. A gas expanding
isothermally, for example, does work on the surrounding, but its internal energy (as represented by the temperature) does not
change, because enough heat flows in to balance out the energy expended in doing work. This is consistent with the first law of
thermodynamics ( 0 = ΔU = Q − W , because Q = W ). An isothermal process occurs if a thermodynamic process in a gas
occurs slowly enough so that the gas remains in thermal equilibrium with the surrounding at all times.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 251