Figure 9.25 The first law of thermodynamics is the conservation-of-energy principle stated for a system where heat and work are the methods of
transferring energy for a system in thermal equilibrium. Q represents the net heat transfer—it is the sum of all heat transfers into and out of the
system. Q is positive for net heat transfer into the system. W is the total work done on and by the system. W is positive when more work is done
by the system than on it. The change in the internal energy of the system, ΔU , is related to heat and work by the first law of thermodynamics,
ΔU = Q − W .
Making Connections: Law of Thermodynamics and Law of Conservation of Energy
The first law of thermodynamics is actually the law of conservation of energy stated in a form most useful in
thermodynamics. The first law gives the relationship between heat transfer, work done, and the change in internal energy of
a system.
Heat Q and Work W
Heat transfer ( Q ) and doing work ( W ) are the two everyday means of bringing energy into or taking energy out of a system.
The processes are quite different. Heat transfer, a less organized process, is driven by temperature differences. Work, a quite
organized process, involves a macroscopic force exerted through a distance. Nevertheless, heat and work can produce identical
results.For example, both can cause a temperature increase. Heat transfer into a system, such as when the Sun warms the air in
a bicycle tire, can increase its temperature, and so can work done on the system, as when the bicyclist pumps air into the tire.
Once the temperature increase has occurred, it is impossible to tell whether it was caused by heat transfer or by doing work. This
uncertainty is an important point. Heat transfer and work are both energy in transit—neither is stored as such in a system.
However, both can change the internal energy U of a system. Internal energy is a form of energy completely different from
either heat or work.
Internal Energy U
We can think about the internal energy of a system in two different but consistent ways. The first is the atomic and molecular
view, which examines the system on the atomic and molecular scale. The internal energy U of a system is the sum of the
kinetic and potential energies of its atoms and molecules. Recall that kinetic plus potential energy is called mechanical energy.
Thus internal energy is the sum of atomic and molecular mechanical energy. Because it is impossible to keep track of all
individual atoms and molecules, we must deal with averages and distributions. A second way to view the internal energy of a
system is in terms of its macroscopic characteristics, which are very similar to atomic and molecular average values.
Macroscopically, we define the change in internal energy ΔU to be that given by the first law of thermodynamics:
(9.37)ΔU = Q − W.
Many detailed experiments have verified that ΔU = Q − W , where ΔU is the change in total kinetic and potential energy of
all atoms and molecules in a system. It has also been determined experimentally that the internal energy U of a system
depends only on the state of the system and not how it reached that state. More specifically, U is found to be a function of a few
macroscopic quantities (pressure, volume, and temperature, for example), independent of past history such as whether there has
been heat transfer or work done. This independence means that if we know the state of a system, we can calculate changes in
its internal energy U from a few macroscopic variables.
Making Connections: Macroscopic and Microscopic
In thermodynamics, we often use the macroscopic picture when making calculations of how a system behaves, while the
atomic and molecular picture gives underlying explanations in terms of averages and distributions. We shall see this again in
later sections of this chapter. For example, in the topic of entropy, calculations will be made using the atomic and molecular
view.
248 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12