only on the state of the system and not how it reached that condition. Entropy is a property of state. Thus the change in entropy
ΔS of a system between state 1 and state 2 is the same no matter how the change occurs. We just need to find or imagine a
reversible process that takes us from state 1 to state 2 and calculate ΔS for that process. That will be the change in entropy for
any process going from state 1 to state 2. (See Figure 9.49.)
Figure 9.49 When a system goes from state 1 to state 2, its entropy changes by the same amount ΔS , whether a hypothetical reversible path is
followed or a real irreversible path is taken.
Now let us take a look at the change in entropy of a Carnot engine and its heat reservoirs for one full cycle. The hot reservoir has
a loss of entropy ΔSh = −Qh / Th , because heat transfer occurs out of it (remember that when heat transfers out, then Q has
a negative sign). The cold reservoir has a gain of entropy ΔSc = Qc / Tc , because heat transfer occurs into it. (We assume the
reservoirs are sufficiently large that their temperatures are constant.) So the total change in entropy is
(9.68)ΔStot = ΔSh + ΔSc.
Thus, since we know that Qh / Th = Qc / Tc for a Carnot engine,
(9.69)
ΔStot =–Qh
Th
+ Qc
Tc
= 0.
This result, which has general validity, means that the total change in entropy for a system in any reversible process is zero.
The entropy of various parts of the system may change, but the total change is zero. Furthermore, the system does not affect the
entropy of its surroundings, since heat transfer between them does not occur. Thus the reversible process changes neither the
total entropy of the system nor the entropy of its surroundings. Sometimes this is stated as follows: Reversible processes do not
affect the total entropy of the universe. Real processes are not reversible, though, and they do change total entropy. We can,
however, use hypothetical reversible processes to determine the value of entropy in real, irreversible processes. The following
example illustrates this point.
Example 9.10 Entropy Increases in an Irreversible (Real) Process
Spontaneous heat transfer from hot to cold is an irreversible process. Calculate the total change in entropy if 4000 J of heat
transfer occurs from a hot reservoir at Th = 600 K(327º C) to a cold reservoir at Tc = 250 K(−23º C) , assuming there
is no temperature change in either reservoir. (See Figure 9.50.)
Strategy
How can we calculate the change in entropy for an irreversible process when ΔStot = ΔSh + ΔSc is valid only for
reversible processes? Remember that the total change in entropy of the hot and cold reservoirs will be the same whether a
reversible or irreversible process is involved in heat transfer from hot to cold. So we can calculate the change in entropy of
the hot reservoir for a hypothetical reversible process in which 4000 J of heat transfer occurs from it; then we do the same
for a hypothetical reversible process in which 4000 J of heat transfer occurs to the cold reservoir. This produces the same
changes in the hot and cold reservoirs that would occur if the heat transfer were allowed to occur irreversibly between them,
and so it also produces the same changes in entropy.
Solution
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 269