10.5 Electric Potential and Potential Energy
When a free positive charge q is accelerated by an electric field, such as shown in Figure 10.17, it is given kinetic energy. The
process is analogous to an object being accelerated by a gravitational field. It is as if the charge is going down an electrical hill
where its electric potential energy is converted to kinetic energy. Let us explore the work done on a charge q by the electric field
in this process, so that we may develop a definition of electric potential energy.
Figure 10.17 A charge accelerated by an electric field is analogous to a mass going down a hill. In both cases potential energy is converted to another
form. Work is done by a force, but since this force is conservative, we can write W = –ΔPE .
The electrostatic or Coulomb force is conservative, which means that the work done on q is independent of the path taken. This
is exactly analogous to the gravitational force in the absence of dissipative forces such as friction. When a force is conservative,
it is possible to define a potential energy associated with the force, and it is usually easier to deal with the potential energy
(because it depends only on position) than to calculate the work done directly from force ( W = < F, d > , where d is
displacement and F is the force).
We use the letters PE to denote electric potential energy, which has units of joules (J). The change in potential energy, ΔPE , is
crucial, since the work done by a conservative force is the negative of the change in potential energy; that is, W = –ΔPE . For
example, work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and results from a loss in PE, or a negative ΔPE .
There must be a minus sign in front of ΔPE to make W positive. PE can be found at any point by taking one point as a
reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to the other point.
Potential Energy
W = –ΔPE . For example, work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and results from a loss in
PE, or a negative ΔPE. There must be a minus sign in front of ΔPE to make W positive. PE can be found at any point
by taking one point as a reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to the other point.
Gravitational potential energy and electric potential energy are quite analogous. Potential energy accounts for work done by a
conservative force and gives added insight regarding energy and energy transformation without the necessity of dealing with the
force directly. It is much more common, for example, to use the concept of voltage (related to electric potential energy) than to
deal with the electric field (related to Coulomb force) directly.
Given some conservative force F and displacement d under the force, the work done and the change in potential energy can
be calculated as, W = < F, d > and ΔPE = −W = < −F, d > . For electric force, the force is given by the product of
electric charge and the electric field, F = qE , where q is the charge experiencing the force and E is the electric field at the
location of the charge. So the potential energy change due to work done by electric force is ΔPE = q( < −E, d > ) . If we
define change in electric potential V as ΔV = < −E, d > , then the electric potential energy PE is simply expressed in
terms of electric potential, PE = qV , or,
(10.16)V = PE
q ,
electric potential energy per charge.
Chapter 10 | Electricity 299