9.10. Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated
• Identify a Carnot cycle.
• Calculate maximum theoretical efficiency of a nuclear reactor.
• Explain how dissipative processes affect the ideal Carnot engine.
9.11. Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators
• Describe the use of heat engines in heat pumps and refrigerators.
• Demonstrate how a heat pump works to warm an interior space.
• Explain the differences between heat pumps and refrigerators.
• Calculate a heat pump’s coefficient of performance.
9.12. Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy
• Define entropy and calculate the increase of entropy in a system with reversible and irreversible processes.
• Calculate the increasing disorder of a system.
9.13. Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation
• Identify probabilities in entropy.
• Analyze statistical probabilities in entropic systems.
Introduction to Thermal Physics
Heat is something familiar to each of us. We feel the warmth of the summer Sun, the chill of a clear summer night, the heat of
coffee after a winter stroll, and the cooling effect of our sweat. Heat transfer is maintained by temperature differences.
Manifestations of heat transfer—the movement of heat energy from one place or material to another—are apparent throughout
the universe. Heat from beneath Earth’s surface is brought to the surface in flows of incandescent lava. The Sun warms Earth’s
surface and is the source of much of the energy we find on it. Rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide threaten to trap more
of the Sun’s energy, perhaps fundamentally altering the ecosphere. In space, supernovas explode, briefly radiating more heat
than an entire galaxy does.
What is heat? How do we define it? How is it related to temperature? What are heat’s effects? How is it related to other forms of
energy and to work? We will find that, in spite of the richness of the phenomena, there is a small set of underlying physical
principles that unite the subjects and tie them to other fields.
Most notably, heat transfer can be used to do work. It can also be converted to any other form of energy. A car engine, for
example, burns fuel for heat transfer into a gas. Work is done by the gas as it exerts a force through a distance, converting its
energy into a variety of other forms—into the car’s kinetic or gravitational potential energy; into electrical energy to run the spark
plugs, radio, and lights; and back into stored energy in the car’s battery. But most of the heat transfer produced from burning fuel
in the engine does not do work on the gas-the engine is quite inefficient.
Basic physical laws govern how heat transfer for doing work takes place and place insurmountable limits onto its efficiency. This
chapter will explore these laws as well as some applications and concepts associated with them. These topics are part of
thermodynamics—the study of heat transfer and its relationship to doing work.
Figure 9.2 In a typical thermometer like this one, the alcohol, with a red dye, expands more rapidly than the glass containing it. When the
thermometer’s temperature increases, the liquid from the bulb is forced into the narrow tube, producing a large change in the length of the column for a
small change in temperature. (credit: Chemical Engineer, Wikimedia Commons)
9.1 Temperature
The concept of temperature has evolved from the common concepts of hot and cold. Human perception of what feels hot or cold
is a relative one. For example, if you place one hand in hot water and the other in cold water, and then place both hands in tepid
water, the tepid water will feel cool to the hand that was in hot water, and warm to the one that was in cold water. The scientific
definition of temperature is less ambiguous than your senses of hot and cold. Temperature is operationally defined to be what
we measure with a thermometer. (Many physical quantities are defined solely in terms of how they are measured. We shall see
later how temperature is related to the kinetic energies of atoms and molecules, a more physical explanation.) Two accurate
thermometers, one placed in hot water and the other in cold water, will show the hot water to have a higher temperature. If they
are then placed in the tepid water, both will give identical readings (within measurement uncertainties). In this section, we discuss
temperature, its measurement by thermometers, and its relationship to thermal equilibrium. Again, temperature is the quantity
measured by a thermometer.
Misconception Alert: Human Perception vs. Reality
On a cold winter morning, the wood on a porch feels warmer than the metal of your bike. The wood and bicycle are in
thermal equilibrium with the outside air, and are thus the same temperature. They feel different because of the difference in
the way that they conduct heat away from your skin. The metal conducts heat away from your body faster than the wood
does. This is just one example demonstrating that the human sense of hot and cold is not determined by temperature alone.
Another factor that affects our perception of temperature is humidity. Most people feel much hotter on hot, humid days than
on hot, dry days. This is because on humid days, sweat does not evaporate from the skin as efficiently as it does on dry
224 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12