engine, like the drinking bird above, while a fascinating novelty, has zero power. This makes it unrealistic for any applications.
Carnot’s interesting result implies that 100% efficiency would be possible only if Tc = 0 K —that is, only if the cold reservoir
were at absolute zero, a practical and theoretical impossibility. But the physical implication is this—the only way to have all heat
transfer go into doing work is to remove all thermal energy, and this requires a cold reservoir at absolute zero.
It is also apparent that the greatest efficiencies are obtained when the ratio Tc / Th is as small as possible. Just as discussed
for the Otto cycle in the previous section, this means that efficiency is greatest for the highest possible temperature of the hot
reservoir and lowest possible temperature of the cold reservoir. (This setup increases the area inside the closed loop on the PV
diagram; also, it seems reasonable that the greater the temperature difference, the easier it is to divert the heat transfer to work.)
The actual reservoir temperatures of a heat engine are usually related to the type of heat source and the temperature of the
environment into which heat transfer occurs. Consider the following example.
Figure 9.38 PV diagram for a Carnot cycle, employing only reversible isothermal and adiabatic processes. Heat transfer Qh occurs into the
working substance during the isothermal path AB, which takes place at constant temperature Th . Heat transfer Qc occurs out of the working
substance during the isothermal path CD, which takes place at constant temperature Tc . The net work output W equals the area inside the path
ABCDA. Also shown is a schematic of a Carnot engine operating between hot and cold reservoirs at temperatures Th and Tc . Any heat engine
using reversible processes and operating between these two temperatures will have the same maximum efficiency as the Carnot engine.
Example 9.8 Maximum Theoretical Efficiency for a Nuclear Reactor
A nuclear power reactor has pressurized water at 300ºC . (Higher temperatures are theoretically possible but practically
not, due to limitations with materials used in the reactor.) Heat transfer from this water is a complex process (see Figure
9.39). Steam, produced in the steam generator, is used to drive the turbine-generators. Eventually the steam is condensed
to water at 27ºC and then heated again to start the cycle over. Calculate the maximum theoretical efficiency for a heat
engine operating between these two temperatures.
260 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12