(9.33)mice Lf = ⎛
⎝0.018 kg⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝334,000 J/kg⎞
⎠=6012 J.
3. Calculate the denominator:
(9.34)(msoda + mice)cW = ⎛
⎝0.25 kg + 0.018 kg⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝4186 K/(kg⋅ºC⎞
⎠=1122 J/ºC.
4. Calculate the final temperature:
(9.35)Tf = 20,930 J − 6012 J
1122 J/ºC = 13ºC.
Discussion
This example illustrates the enormous energies involved during a phase change. The mass of ice is about 7 percent the
mass of water but leads to a noticeable change in the temperature of soda. Although we assumed that the ice was at the
freezing temperature, this is incorrect: the typical temperature is −6ºC . However, this correction gives a final temperature
that is essentially identical to the result we found. Can you explain why?
We have seen that vaporization requires heat transfer to a liquid from the surroundings, so that energy is released by the
surroundings. Condensation is the reverse process, increasing the temperature of the surroundings. This increase may seem
surprising, since we associate condensation with cold objects—the glass in the figure, for example. However, energy must be
removed from the condensing molecules to make a vapor condense. The energy is exactly the same as that required to make
the phase change in the other direction, from liquid to vapor, and so it can be calculated from Q = mLv .
Figure 9.21 Condensation forms on this glass of iced tea because the temperature of the nearby air is reduced to below the dew point. The air cannot
hold as much water as it did at room temperature, and so water condenses. Energy is released when the water condenses, speeding the melting of the
ice in the glass. (credit: Jenny Downing)
Real-World Application
Energy is also released when a liquid freezes. This phenomenon is used by fruit growers in Florida to protect oranges when
the temperature is close to the freezing point (0ºC) . Growers spray water on the plants in orchards so that the water
freezes and heat is released to the growing oranges on the trees. This prevents the temperature inside the orange from
dropping below freezing, which would damage the fruit.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 245