Figure 10.22 The mutual repulsion of excess positive charges on a spherical conductor distributes them uniformly on its surface. The resulting
electric field is perpendicular to the surface and zero inside. Outside the conductor, the field is identical to that of a point charge at the center
equal to the excess charge.
Properties of a Conductor in Electrostatic Equilibrium
1. The electric field is zero inside a conductor.
2. Just outside a conductor, the electric field lines are perpendicular to its surface, ending or beginning on charges on the
surface.
3. Any excess charge resides entirely on the surface or surfaces of a conductor.
The properties of a conductor are consistent with the situations already discussed and can be used to analyze any conductor in
electrostatic equilibrium. This can lead to some interesting new insights, such as described below.
How can a very uniform electric field be created? Consider a system of two metal plates with opposite charges on them, as
shown in Figure 10.23. The properties of conductors in electrostatic equilibrium indicate that the electric field between the plates
will be uniform in strength and direction. Except near the edges (which can be ignored when plates are close to each other), the
excess charges distribute themselves uniformly, producing field lines that are uniformly spaced (hence uniform in strength) and
perpendicular to the surfaces (hence uniform in direction, since the plates are flat).
Figure 10.23 Two metal plates with equal, but opposite, excess charges. The field between them is uniform in strength and direction except near the
edges. One use of such a field is to produce uniform acceleration of charges between the plates, such as in the electron gun of a TV tube.
In fact, this is a particular example of electric circuit elements called capacitors. This particular example is called a parallel-
plate capacitor and can be used to analyze properties of capacitors in general, such as how many charges can be stored using
two nearby conductors set at a certain electric potential difference (voltage) apart. Capacitors find wide use in electric circuits
alongside the resistors and inductors that you will learn about later.
Electric Fields on Uneven Surfaces
So far we have considered excess charges on a smooth, symmetrical conductor surface. What happens if a conductor has sharp
corners or is pointed? Excess charges on a nonuniform conductor become concentrated at the sharpest points. Additionally,
excess charge may move on or off the conductor at the sharpest points. To see how and why this happens, consider the charged
conductor in Figure 10.24. The electrostatic repulsion of like charges is most effective in moving them apart on the flattest
surface, and so they become least concentrated there. The same effect is produced on a conductor by an externally applied
electric field, as seen in Figure 10.24 (c). Since the field lines must be perpendicular to the surface, more of them are
concentrated on the most curved parts.
Chapter 10 | Electricity 305