and then to apply the appropriate equation. Keep in mind that heat transfer and work can cause both temperature and phase
changes.
Check Your Understanding
Why does snow remain on mountain slopes even when daytime temperatures are higher than the freezing temperature?
Solution
Snow is formed from ice crystals and thus is the solid phase of water. Because enormous heat is necessary for phase
changes, it takes a certain amount of time for this heat to be accumulated from the air, even if the air is above 0ºC . The
warmer the air is, the faster this heat exchange occurs and the faster the snow melts.
9.7 The First Law of Thermodynamics
Figure 9.24 This boiling tea kettle represents energy in motion. The water in the kettle is turning to water vapor because heat is being transferred from
the stove to the kettle. As the entire system gets hotter, work is done—from the evaporation of the water to the whistling of the kettle. (credit: Gina
Hamilton)
If we are interested in how heat transfer is converted into doing work, then the conservation of energy principle is important. The
first law of thermodynamics applies the conservation of energy principle to systems where heat transfer and doing work are the
methods of transferring energy into and out of the system. The first law of thermodynamics states that the change in internal
energy of a system equals the net heat transfer into the system minus the net work done by the system. In equation form, the
first law of thermodynamics is
(9.36)ΔU = Q − W.
Here ΔU is the change in internal energy U of the system. Q is the net heat transferred into the system—that is, Q is the
sum of all heat transfer into and out of the system. W is the net work done by the system—that is, W is the sum of all work
done on or by the system. We use the following sign conventions: if Q is positive, then there is a net heat transfer into the
system; if W is positive, then there is net work done by the system. So positive Q adds energy to the system and positive W
takes energy from the system. Thus ΔU = Q − W . Note also that if more heat transfer into the system occurs than work done,
the difference is stored as internal energy. Heat engines are a good example of this—heat transfer into them takes place so that
they can do work. (See Figure 9.25.) We will now examine Q , W , and ΔU further.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 247