three building blocks of most matter. (The third is the neutron, which is neutral, carrying no charge.) Other charge-carrying
particles are observed in cosmic rays and nuclear decay, and are created in particle accelerators. All but the electron and proton
survive only a short time and are quite rare by comparison.
Figure 10.5 This simplified (and not to scale) view of an atom is called the planetary model of the atom. Negative electrons orbit a much heavier
positive nucleus, as the planets orbit the much heavier sun. There the similarity ends, because forces in the atom are electromagnetic, whereas those
in the planetary system are gravitational. Normal macroscopic amounts of matter contain immense numbers of atoms and molecules and, hence, even
greater numbers of individual negative and positive charges.
The charges of electrons and protons are identical in magnitude but opposite in sign. Furthermore, all charged objects in nature
are integral multiples of this basic quantity of charge, meaning that all charges are made of combinations of a basic unit of
charge. Usually, charges are formed by combinations of electrons and protons. The magnitude of this basic charge is
(10.1)∣ qe ∣ = 1.60×10−19 C.
The symbol q is commonly used for charge and the subscript e indicates the charge of a single electron (or proton).
The SI unit of charge is the coulomb (C). The number of protons needed to make a charge of 1.00 C is
(10.2)
1.00 C× 1 proton
1.60×10−19 C
= 6.25×1018 protons.
Similarly, 6.25×1018 electrons have a combined charge of −1.00 coulomb. Just as there is a smallest bit of an element (an
atom), there is a smallest bit of charge. There is no directly observed charge smaller than ∣ qe ∣ , and all observed charges are
integral multiples of ∣ qe ∣ .
Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Charge
With the exception of exotic, short-lived particles, all charge in nature is carried by electrons and protons. Electrons carry the
charge we have named negative. Protons carry an equal-magnitude charge that we call positive. (See Figure 10.6.)
Electron and proton charges are considered fundamental building blocks, since all other charges are integral multiples of
those carried by electrons and protons. Electrons and protons are also two of the three fundamental building blocks of
ordinary matter. The neutron is the third and has zero total charge.
Figure 10.6 shows a person touching a Van de Graaff generator and receiving excess positive charge. The expanded view of a
hair shows the existence of both types of charges but an excess of positive. The repulsion of these positive like charges causes
the strands of hair to repel other strands of hair and to stand up. The further blowup shows an artist’s conception of an electron
and a proton perhaps found in an atom in a strand of hair.
290 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12