room, heat transfer to the room occurs and the gas condenses to a liquid. The liquid then flows back through a pressure-
reducing valve to the outdoor evaporator coils, being cooled through expansion. (In a cooling cycle, the evaporator and
condenser coils exchange roles and the flow direction of the fluid is reversed.)
The quality of a heat pump is judged by how much heat transfer Qh occurs into the warm space compared with how much work
input W is required. In the spirit of taking the ratio of what you get to what you spend, we define a heat pump’s coefficient of
performance ( COPhp ) to be
(9.57)
COPhp = Qh
W .
Since the efficiency of a heat engine is Eff = W / Qh , we see that COPhp = 1 / Eff , an important and interesting fact. First,
since the efficiency of any heat engine is less than 1, it means that COPhp is always greater than 1—that is, a heat pump
always has more heat transfer Qh than work put into it. Second, it means that heat pumps work best when temperature
differences are small. The efficiency of a perfect, or Carnot, engine is EffC = 1 − ⎛
⎝Tc / Th
⎞
⎠ ; thus, the smaller the temperature
difference, the smaller the efficiency and the greater the COPhp (because COPhp = 1 / Eff ). In other words, heat pumps do
not work as well in very cold climates as they do in more moderate climates.
Friction and other irreversible processes reduce heat engine efficiency, but they do not benefit the operation of a heat
pump—instead, they reduce the work input by converting part of it to heat transfer back into the cold reservoir before it gets into
the heat pump.
Figure 9.45 When a real heat engine is run backward, some of the intended work input (W) goes into heat transfer before it gets into the heat
engine, thereby reducing its coefficient of performance COPhp . In this figure, W' represents the portion of W that goes into the heat pump, while
the remainder of W is lost in the form of frictional heat ⎛
⎝Q f
⎞
⎠ to the cold reservoir. If all of W had gone into the heat pump, then Qh would have
been greater. The best heat pump uses adiabatic and isothermal processes, since, in theory, there would be no dissipative processes to reduce the
heat transfer to the hot reservoir.
Example 9.9 The Best COP hp of a Heat Pump for Home Use
A heat pump used to warm a home must employ a cycle that produces a working fluid at temperatures greater than typical
indoor temperature so that heat transfer to the inside can take place. Similarly, it must produce a working fluid at
temperatures that are colder than the outdoor temperature so that heat transfer occurs from outside. Its hot and cold
reservoir temperatures therefore cannot be too close, placing a limit on its COPhp . (See Figure 9.46.) What is the best
coefficient of performance possible for such a heat pump, if it has a hot reservoir temperature of 45.0ºC and a cold
reservoir temperature of −15.0ºC ?
Strategy
A Carnot engine reversed will give the best possible performance as a heat pump. As noted above, COPhp = 1 / Eff , so
that we need to first calculate the Carnot efficiency to solve this problem.
Solution
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 265