Figure 9.22 The ice on these trees released large amounts of energy when it froze, helping to prevent the temperature of the trees from dropping
below 0ºC . Water is intentionally sprayed on orchards to help prevent hard frosts. (credit: Hermann Hammer)
Sublimation is the transition from solid to vapor phase. You may have noticed that snow can disappear into thin air without a
trace of liquid water, or the disappearance of ice cubes in a freezer. The reverse is also true: Frost can form on very cold
windows without going through the liquid stage. A popular effect is the making of “smoke” from dry ice, which is solid carbon
dioxide. Sublimation occurs because the equilibrium vapor pressure of solids is not zero. Certain air fresheners use the
sublimation of a solid to inject a perfume into the room. Moth balls are a slightly toxic example of a phenol (an organic
compound) that sublimates, while some solids, such as osmium tetroxide, are so toxic that they must be kept in sealed
containers to prevent human exposure to their sublimation-produced vapors.
Figure 9.23 Direct transitions between solid and vapor are common, sometimes useful, and even beautiful. (a) Dry ice sublimates directly to carbon
dioxide gas. The visible vapor is made of water droplets. (credit: Windell Oskay) (b) Frost forms patterns on a very cold window, an example of a solid
formed directly from a vapor. (credit: Liz West)
All phase transitions involve heat. In the case of direct solid-vapor transitions, the energy required is given by the equation
Q = mL s , where Ls is the heat of sublimation, which is the energy required to change 1.00 kg of a substance from the solid
phase to the vapor phase. Ls is analogous to Lf and Lv , and its value depends on the substance. Sublimation requires
energy input, so that dry ice is an effective coolant, whereas the reverse process (i.e., frosting) releases energy. The amount of
energy required for sublimation is of the same order of magnitude as that for other phase transitions.
The material presented in this section and the preceding section allows us to calculate any number of effects related to
temperature and phase change. In each case, it is necessary to identify which temperature and phase changes are taking place
246 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12