(10.40)e–
s = –0.300×10 – 3 C
s × 1 e–
–1.60×10−19 C
= 1.88×1015 e–
s .
Discussion
There are so many charged particles moving, even in small currents, that individual charges are not noticed, just as
individual water molecules are not noticed in water flow. Even more amazing is that they do not always keep moving forward
like soldiers in a parade. Rather they are like a crowd of people with movement in different directions but a general trend to
move forward. There are lots of collisions with atoms in the metal wire and, of course, with other electrons.
10.8 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits
What drives current? We can think of various devices—such as batteries, generators, wall outlets, and so on—which are
necessary to maintain a current. All such devices create a potential difference and are loosely referred to as voltage sources.
When a voltage source is connected to a conductor, it applies a potential difference V that creates an electric field. The electric
field in turn exerts force on charges, causing current.
Ohm’s Law
The current that flows through most substances is directly proportional to the voltage V applied to it. The German physicist
Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854) was the first to demonstrate experimentally that the current in a metal wire is directly
proportional to the voltage applied:
(10.41)I ∝ V.
This important relationship is known as Ohm’s law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship, with voltage the cause
and current the effect. This is an empirical law like that for friction—an experimentally observed phenomenon. Such a linear
relationship doesn’t always occur.
Resistance and Simple Circuits
If voltage drives current, what impedes it? The electric property that impedes current (crudely similar to friction and air
resistance) is called resistance R . Collisions of moving charges with atoms and molecules in a substance transfer energy to
the substance and limit current. Resistance is defined as inversely proportional to current, or
(10.42)I ∝ 1
R.
Thus, for example, current is cut in half if resistance doubles. Combining the relationships of current to voltage and current to
resistance gives
(10.43)I = V
R.
This relationship is also called Ohm’s law. Ohm’s law in this form really defines resistance for certain materials. Ohm’s law (like
Hooke’s law) is not universally valid. The many substances for which Ohm’s law holds are called ohmic. These include good
conductors like copper and aluminum, and some poor conductors under certain circumstances. Ohmic materials have a
resistance R that is independent of voltage V and current I . An object that has simple resistance is called a resistor, even if
its resistance is small. The unit for resistance is an ohm and is given the symbol Ω (upper case Greek omega). Rearranging
I = V/R gives R = V/I , and so the units of resistance are 1 ohm = 1 volt per ampere:
(10.44)1 Ω = 1V
A.
Figure 10.35 shows the schematic for a simple circuit. A simple circuit has a single voltage source and a single resistor. The
wires connecting the voltage source to the resistor can be assumed to have negligible resistance, or their resistance can be
included in R .
Chapter 10 | Electricity 313