Figure 9.47 In hot weather, heat transfer occurs from air inside the room to air outside, cooling the room. In cool weather, heat transfer occurs from air
outside to air inside, warming the room. This switching is achieved by reversing the direction of flow of the working fluid.
Air Conditioners and Refrigerators
Air conditioners and refrigerators are designed to cool something down in a warm environment. As with heat pumps, work input
is required for heat transfer from cold to hot, and this is expensive. The quality of air conditioners and refrigerators is judged by
how much heat transfer Qc occurs from a cold environment compared with how much work input W is required. What is
considered the benefit in a heat pump is considered waste heat in a refrigerator. We thus define the coefficient of performance
(COPref ) of an air conditioner or refrigerator to be
(9.63)COPref = Qc
W .
Noting again that Qh = Qc + W , we can see that an air conditioner will have a lower coefficient of performance than a heat
pump, because COPhp = Qh / W and Qh is greater than Qc . In this module’s Problems and Exercises, you will show that
(9.64)COPref = COPhp − 1
for a heat engine used as either an air conditioner or a heat pump operating between the same two temperatures. Real air
conditioners and refrigerators typically do remarkably well, having values of COPref ranging from 2 to 6. These numbers are
better than the COPhp values for the heat pumps mentioned above, because the temperature differences are smaller, but they
are less than those for Carnot engines operating between the same two temperatures.
A type of COP rating system called the “energy efficiency rating” ( EER ) has been developed. This rating is an example where
non-SI units are still used and relevant to consumers. To make it easier for the consumer, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and
the U.S. use an Energy Star Rating out of 5 stars—the more stars, the more energy efficient the appliance. EERs are
expressed in mixed units of British thermal units (Btu) per hour of heating or cooling divided by the power input in watts. Room
air conditioners are readily available with EERs ranging from 6 to 12. Although not the same as the COPs just described,
these EERs are good for comparison purposes—the greater the EER , the cheaper an air conditioner is to operate (but the
higher its purchase price is likely to be).
The EER of an air conditioner or refrigerator can be expressed as
(9.65)
EER = Qc / t1
W / t2
,
where Qc is the amount of heat transfer from a cold environment in British thermal units, t1 is time in hours, W is the work
input in joules, and t2 is time in seconds.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Thermodynamics
1. Examine the situation to determine whether heat, work, or internal energy are involved. Look for any system where the
primary methods of transferring energy are heat and work. Heat engines, heat pumps, refrigerators, and air
conditioners are examples of such systems.
2. Identify the system of interest and draw a labeled diagram of the system showing energy flow.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful. Maximum
efficiency means a Carnot engine is involved. Efficiency is not the same as the coefficient of performance.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). Be sure to distinguish
heat transfer into a system from heat transfer out of the system, as well as work input from work output. In many
situations, it is useful to determine the type of process, such as isothermal or adiabatic.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 267