temperatures of water at standard atmospheric pressure are commonly used.
The Celsius scale (which replaced the slightly different centigrade scale) has the freezing point of water at 0ºC and the boiling
point at 100ºC . Its unit is the degree Celsius (ºC) . On the Fahrenheit scale (still the most frequently used in the United
States), the freezing point of water is at 32ºF and the boiling point is at 212ºF . The unit of temperature on this scale is the
degree Fahrenheit (ºF) . Note that a temperature difference of one degree Celsius is greater than a temperature difference of
one degree Fahrenheit. Only 100 Celsius degrees span the same range as 180 Fahrenheit degrees, thus one degree on the
Celsius scale is 1.8 times larger than one degree on the Fahrenheit scale 180 / 100 = 9 / 5.
The Kelvin scale is the temperature scale that is commonly used in science. It is an absolute temperature scale defined to have
0 K at the lowest possible temperature, called absolute zero. The official temperature unit on this scale is the kelvin, which is
abbreviated K, and is not accompanied by a degree sign. The freezing and boiling points of water are 273.15 K and 373.15 K,
respectively. Thus, the magnitude of temperature differences is the same in units of kelvins and degrees Celsius. Unlike other
temperature scales, the Kelvin scale is an absolute scale. It is used extensively in scientific work because a number of physical
quantities, such as the volume of an ideal gas, are directly related to absolute temperature. The kelvin is the SI unit used in
scientific work.
Figure 9.6 Relationships between the Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin temperature scales, rounded to the nearest degree. The relative sizes of the
scales are also shown.
The relationships between the three common temperature scales is shown in Figure 9.6.
Temperature Ranges in the Universe
Figure 9.8 shows the wide range of temperatures found in the universe. Human beings have been known to survive with body
temperatures within a small range, from 24ºC to 44ºC (75ºF to 111ºF ). The average normal body temperature is usually
given as 37.0ºC ( 98.6ºF ), and variations in this temperature can indicate a medical condition: a fever, an infection, a tumor, or
circulatory problems (see Figure 9.7).
226 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12