Figure 10.29 In a laser printer, a laser beam is scanned across a photoconducting drum, leaving a positive charge image. The other steps for charging
the drum and transferring the image to paper are the same as in xerography. Laser light can be very precisely controlled, enabling laser printers to
produce high-quality images.
Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting
The ink jet printer, commonly used to print computer-generated text and graphics, also employs electrostatics. A nozzle makes
a fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then given an electrostatic charge. (See Figure 10.30.)
Once charged, the droplets can be directed, using pairs of charged plates, with great precision to form letters and images on
paper. Ink jet printers can produce color images by using a black jet and three other jets with primary colors, usually cyan,
magenta, and yellow, much as a color television produces color. (This is more difficult with xerography, requiring multiple drums
and toners.)
Figure 10.30 The nozzle of an ink-jet printer produces small ink droplets, which are sprayed with electrostatic charge. Various computer-driven devices
are then used to direct the droplets to the correct positions on a page.
Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto odd-shaped surfaces. Mutual repulsion of like charges
causes the paint to fly away from its source. Surface tension forms drops, which are then attracted by unlike charges to the
surface to be painted. Electrostatic painting can reach those hard-to-get at places, applying an even coat in a controlled manner.
If the object is a conductor, the electric field is perpendicular to the surface, tending to bring the drops in perpendicularly. Corners
and points on conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be applied.
Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning
Another important application of electrostatics is found in air cleaners, both large and small. The electrostatic part of the process
places excess (usually positive) charge on smoke, dust, pollen, and other particles in the air and then passes the air through an
oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains the charged particles. (See Figure 10.31.)
Large electrostatic precipitators are used industrially to remove over 99% of the particles from stack gas emissions associated
with the burning of coal and oil. Home precipitators, often in conjunction with the home heating and air conditioning system, are
very effective in removing polluting particles, irritants, and allergens.
Chapter 10 | Electricity 309