Explain your observations.
Xerography
Most copy machines use an electrostatic process called xerography—a word coined from the Greek words xeros for dry and
graphos for writing. The heart of the process is shown in simplified form in Figure 10.28.
A selenium-coated aluminum drum is sprayed with positive charge from points on a device called a corotron. Selenium is a
substance with an interesting property—it is a photoconductor. That is, selenium is an insulator when in the dark and a
conductor when exposed to light.
In the first stage of the xerography process, the conducting aluminum drum is grounded so that a negative charge is induced
under the thin layer of uniformly positively charged selenium. In the second stage, the surface of the drum is exposed to the
image of whatever is to be copied. Where the image is light, the selenium becomes conducting, and the positive charge is
neutralized. In dark areas, the positive charge remains, and so the image has been transferred to the drum.
The third stage takes a dry black powder, called toner, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it will be attracted to the
positive regions of the drum. Next, a blank piece of paper is given a greater positive charge than on the drum so that it will pull
the toner from the drum. Finally, the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through heated pressure rollers, which melt
and permanently adhere the toner within the fibers of the paper.
Figure 10.28 Xerography is a dry copying process based on electrostatics. The major steps in the process are the charging of the photoconducting
drum, transfer of an image creating a positive charge duplicate, attraction of toner to the charged parts of the drum, and transfer of toner to the paper.
Not shown are heat treatment of the paper and cleansing of the drum for the next copy.
Laser Printers
Laser printers use the xerographic process to make high-quality images on paper, employing a laser to produce an image on
the photoconducting drum as shown in Figure 10.29. In its most common application, the laser printer receives output from a
computer, and it can achieve high-quality output because of the precision with which laser light can be controlled. Many laser
printers do significant information processing, such as making sophisticated letters or fonts, and may contain a computer more
powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed.
308 Chapter 10 | Electricity
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12