(9.51)2.50×1014 J
2.50×106 J/kg
= 1.0×108 kg.
Assuming that the coal is pure and that all the coal goes toward producing carbon dioxide, the carbon dioxide produced per
day is
(9.52)
1.0×108 kg coal×44 kg CO2
12 kg coal = 3.7×108 kg CO2.
This is 370,000 metric tons of CO2 produced every day.
Discussion
If all the work output is converted to electricity in a period of one day, the average power output is 1180 MW (this is left to
you as an end-of-chapter problem). This value is about the size of a large-scale conventional power plant. The efficiency
found is acceptably close to the value of 42% given for coal power stations. It means that fully 59.2% of the energy is heat
transfer to the environment, which usually results in warming lakes, rivers, or the ocean near the power station, and is
implicated in a warming planet generally. While the laws of thermodynamics limit the efficiency of such plants—including
plants fired by nuclear fuel, oil, and natural gas—the heat transfer to the environment could be, and sometimes is, used for
heating homes or for industrial processes. The generally low cost of energy has not made it economical to make better use
of the waste heat transfer from most heat engines. Coal-fired power plants produce the greatest amount of CO2 per unit
energy output (compared to natural gas or oil), making coal the least efficient fossil fuel.
With the information given in Example 9.7, we can find characteristics such as the efficiency of a heat engine without any
knowledge of how the heat engine operates, but looking further into the mechanism of the engine will give us greater insight.
Figure 9.34 illustrates the operation of the common four-stroke gasoline engine. The four steps shown complete this heat
engine’s cycle, bringing the gasoline-air mixture back to its original condition.
The Otto cycle shown in Figure 9.35(a) is used in four-stroke internal combustion engines, although in fact the true Otto cycle
paths do not correspond exactly to the strokes of the engine.
The adiabatic process AB corresponds to the nearly adiabatic compression stroke of the gasoline engine. In both cases, work is
done on the system (the gas mixture in the cylinder), increasing its temperature and pressure. Along path BC of the Otto cycle,
heat transfer Qh into the gas occurs at constant volume, causing a further increase in pressure and temperature. This process
corresponds to burning fuel in an internal combustion engine, and takes place so rapidly that the volume is nearly constant. Path
CD in the Otto cycle is an adiabatic expansion that does work on the outside world, just as the power stroke of an internal
combustion engine does in its nearly adiabatic expansion. The work done by the system along path CD is greater than the work
done on the system along path AB, because the pressure is greater, and so there is a net work output. Along path DA in the Otto
cycle, heat transfer Qc from the gas at constant volume reduces its temperature and pressure, returning it to its original state. In
an internal combustion engine, this process corresponds to the exhaust of hot gases and the intake of an air-gasoline mixture at
a considerably lower temperature. In both cases, heat transfer into the environment occurs along this final path.
The net work done by a cyclical process is the area inside the closed path on a PV diagram, such as that inside path ABCDA in
Figure 9.35. Note that in every imaginable cyclical process, it is absolutely necessary for heat transfer from the system to occur
in order to get a net work output. In the Otto cycle, heat transfer occurs along path DA. If no heat transfer occurs, then the return
path is the same, and the net work output is zero. The lower the temperature on the path AB, the less work has to be done to
compress the gas. The area inside the closed path is then greater, and so the engine does more work and is thus more efficient.
Similarly, the higher the temperature along path CD, the more work output there is. (See Figure 9.36.) So efficiency is related to
the temperatures of the hot and cold reservoirs. In the next section, we shall see what the absolute limit to the efficiency of a heat
engine is, and how it is related to temperature.
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 257