10.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge
Figure 10.3 Borneo amber was mined in Sabah, Malaysia, from shale-sandstone-mudstone veins. When a piece of amber is rubbed with a piece of
silk, the amber gains more electrons, giving it a net negative charge. At the same time, the silk, having lost electrons, becomes positively charged.
(credit: Sebakoamber, Wikimedia Commons)
What makes plastic wrap cling? Static electricity. Not only are applications of static electricity common these days, its existence
has been known since ancient times. The first record of its effects dates to ancient Greeks who noted more than 500 years B.C.
that polishing amber temporarily enabled it to attract bits of straw (see Figure 10.3). The very word electric derives from the
Greek word for amber (electron).
Many of the characteristics of static electricity can be explored by rubbing things together. Rubbing creates the spark you get
from walking across a wool carpet, for example. Static cling generated in a clothes dryer and the attraction of straw to recently
polished amber also result from rubbing. Similarly, lightning results from air movements under certain weather conditions. You
can also rub a balloon on your hair, and the static electricity created can then make the balloon cling to a wall. We also have to
be cautious of static electricity, especially in dry climates. When we pump gasoline, we are warned to discharge ourselves (after
sliding across the seat) on a metal surface before grabbing the gas nozzle. Attendants in hospital operating rooms must wear
booties with aluminum foil on the bottoms to avoid creating sparks which may ignite the oxygen being used.
Some of the most basic characteristics of static electricity include:
• The effects of static electricity are explained by a physical quantity not previously introduced, called electric charge.
• There are only two types of charge, one called positive and the other called negative.
• Like charges repel, whereas unlike charges attract.
• The force between charges decreases with distance.
How do we know there are two types of electric charge? When various materials are rubbed together in controlled ways, certain
combinations of materials always produce one type of charge on one material and the opposite type on the other. By convention,
we call one type of charge “positive”, and the other type “negative.” For example, when glass is rubbed with silk, the glass
becomes positively charged and the silk negatively charged. Since the glass and silk have opposite charges, they attract one
another like clothes that have rubbed together in a dryer. Two glass rods rubbed with silk in this manner will repel one another,
since each rod has positive charge on it. Similarly, two silk cloths so rubbed will repel, since both cloths have negative charge.
Figure 10.4 shows how these simple materials can be used to explore the nature of the force between charges.
Figure 10.4 A glass rod becomes positively charged when rubbed with silk, while the silk becomes negatively charged. (a) The glass rod is attracted to
the silk because their charges are opposite. (b) Two similarly charged glass rods repel. (c) Two similarly charged silk cloths repel.
More sophisticated questions arise. Where do these charges come from? Can you create or destroy charge? Is there a smallest
unit of charge? Exactly how does the force depend on the amount of charge and the distance between charges? Such questions
obviously occurred to Benjamin Franklin and other early researchers, and they interest us even today.
Charge Carried by Electrons and Protons
Franklin wrote in his letters and books that he could see the effects of electric charge but did not understand what caused the
phenomenon. Today we have the advantage of knowing that normal matter is made of atoms, and that atoms contain positive
and negative charges, usually in equal amounts.
Figure 10.5 shows a simple model of an atom with negative electrons orbiting its positive nucleus. The nucleus is positive due
to the presence of positively charged protons. Nearly all charge in nature is due to electrons and protons, which are two of the
Chapter 10 | Electricity 289