9.10 Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated
Figure 9.37 This novelty toy, known as the drinking bird, is an example of Carnot’s engine. It contains methylene chloride (mixed with a dye) in the
abdomen, which boils at a very low temperature—about 100ºF . To operate, one gets the bird’s head wet. As the water evaporates, fluid moves up
into the head, causing the bird to become top-heavy and dip forward back into the water. This cools down the methylene chloride in the head, and it
moves back into the abdomen, causing the bird to become bottom heavy and tip up. Except for a very small input of energy—the original head-
wetting—the bird becomes a perpetual motion machine of sorts. (credit: Arabesk.nl, Wikimedia Commons)
We know from the second law of thermodynamics that a heat engine cannot be 100% efficient, since there must always be some
heat transfer Qc to the environment, which is often called waste heat. How efficient, then, can a heat engine be? This question
was answered at a theoretical level in 1824 by a young French engineer, Sadi Carnot (1796–1832), in his study of the then-
emerging heat engine technology crucial to the Industrial Revolution. He devised a theoretical cycle, now called the Carnot
cycle, which is the most efficient cyclical process possible. The second law of thermodynamics can be restated in terms of the
Carnot cycle, and so what Carnot actually discovered was this fundamental law. Any heat engine employing the Carnot cycle is
called a Carnot engine.
What is crucial to the Carnot cycle—and, in fact, defines it—is that only reversible processes are used. Irreversible processes
involve dissipative factors, such as friction and turbulence. This increases heat transfer Qc to the environment and reduces the
efficiency of the engine. Obviously, then, reversible processes are superior.
Carnot Engine
Stated in terms of reversible processes, the second law of thermodynamics has a third form:
A Carnot engine operating between two given temperatures has the greatest possible efficiency of any heat engine
operating between these two temperatures. Furthermore, all engines employing only reversible processes have this same
maximum efficiency when operating between the same given temperatures.
Figure 9.38 shows the PV diagram for a Carnot cycle. The cycle comprises two isothermal and two adiabatic processes. Recall
that both isothermal and adiabatic processes are, in principle, reversible.
Carnot also determined the efficiency of a perfect heat engine—that is, a Carnot engine. It is always true that the efficiency of a
cyclical heat engine is given by:
(9.53)
Eff = Qh − Qc
Qh
= 1 − Qc
Qh
.
What Carnot found was that for a perfect heat engine, the ratio Qc / Qh equals the ratio of the absolute temperatures of the
heat reservoirs. That is, Qc / Qh = Tc / Th for a Carnot engine, so that the maximum or Carnot efficiency EffC is given by
(9.54)EffC = 1 − Tc
Th
,
where Th and Tc are in kelvins (or any other absolute temperature scale). No real heat engine can do as well as the Carnot
efficiency—an actual efficiency of about 0.7 of this maximum is usually the best that can be accomplished. But the ideal Carnot
Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics 259