2. Each resistor in parallel has the same full voltage of the source applied to it. (Power distribution systems most often
use parallel connections to supply the myriad devices served with the same voltage and to allow them to operate
independently.)
3. Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; they divide it.
Combinations of Series and Parallel
More complex connections of resistors are sometimes just combinations of series and parallel. These are commonly
encountered, especially when wire resistance is considered. In that case, wire resistance is in series with other resistances that
are in parallel.
Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique illustrated in Figure
10.41. Various parts are identified as either series or parallel, reduced to their equivalents, and further reduced until a single
resistance is left. The process is more time consuming than difficult.
Figure 10.41 This combination of seven resistors has both series and parallel parts. Each is identified and reduced to an equivalent resistance, and
these are further reduced until a single equivalent resistance is reached.
The simplest combination of series and parallel resistance, shown in Figure 10.42, is also the most instructive, since it is found
in many applications. For example, R1 could be the resistance of wires from a car battery to its electrical devices, which are in
parallel. R2 and R3 could be the starter motor and a passenger compartment light. We have previously assumed that wire
resistance is negligible, but, when it is not, it has important effects, as the next example indicates.
Example 10.14 Calculating Resistance, IR Drop, Current, and Power Dissipation: Combining
Series and Parallel Circuits
Figure 10.42 shows the resistors from the previous two examples wired in a different way—a combination of series and
parallel. We can consider R1 to be the resistance of wires leading to R2 and R3 . (a) Find the total resistance. (b) What is
the IR drop in R1 ? (c) Find the current I2 through R2 . (d) What power is dissipated by R2 ?
Chapter 10 | Electricity 323