Figure 10.6 When this person touches a Van de Graaff generator, she receives an excess of positive charge, causing her hair to stand on end. The
charges in one hair are shown. An artist’s conception of an electron and a proton illustrate the particles carrying the negative and positive charges. We
cannot really see these particles with visible light because they are so small (the electron seems to be an infinitesimal point), but we know a great deal
about their measurable properties, such as the charges they carry.
The electron seems to have no substructure; in contrast, when the substructure of protons is explored by scattering extremely
energetic electrons from them, it appears that there are point-like particles inside the proton. These sub-particles, named quarks,
have never been directly observed, but they are believed to carry fractional charges as seen in Figure 10.7. Charges on
electrons and protons and all other directly observable particles are unitary, but these quark substructures carry charges of either
− 1
3 or + 2
3 . There are continuing attempts to observe fractional charge directly and to learn of the properties of quarks, which
are perhaps the ultimate substructure of matter.
Figure 10.7 Artist’s conception of fractional quark charges inside a proton. A group of three quark charges add up to the single positive charge on the
proton: − 1
3
qe + 2
3
qe + 2
3
qe = +1qe .
Separation of Charge in Atoms
Charges in atoms and molecules can be separated—for example, by rubbing materials together. Some atoms and molecules
have a greater affinity for electrons than others and will become negatively charged by close contact in rubbing, leaving the other
material positively charged. (See Figure 10.8.) Positive charge can similarly be induced by rubbing. Methods other than rubbing
can also separate charges. Batteries, for example, use combinations of substances that interact in such a way as to separate
charges. Chemical interactions may transfer negative charge from one substance to the other, making one battery terminal
negative and leaving the first one positive.
Chapter 10 | Electricity 291