Figure 9.32 Examples of one-way processes in nature. (a) Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from hot to cold and not from cold to hot. (b) The
brakes of this car convert its kinetic energy to heat transfer to the environment. The reverse process is impossible. (c) The burst of gas let into this
vacuum chamber quickly expands to uniformly fill every part of the chamber. The random motions of the gas molecules will never return them to the
corner.
The fact that certain processes never occur suggests that there is a law forbidding them to occur. The first law of
thermodynamics would allow them to occur—none of those processes violate conservation of energy. The law that forbids these
processes is called the second law of thermodynamics. We shall see that the second law can be stated in many ways that may
seem different, but which in fact are equivalent. Like all natural laws, the second law of thermodynamics gives insights into
nature, and its several statements imply that it is broadly applicable, fundamentally affecting many apparently disparate
processes.
The already familiar direction of heat transfer from hot to cold is the basis of our first version of the second law of
thermodynamics.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics (first expression)
Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from higher- to lower-temperature bodies but never spontaneously in the reverse
direction.
Another way of stating this: It is impossible for any process to have as its sole result heat transfer from a cooler to a hotter object.
Heat Engines
Now let us consider a device that uses heat transfer to do work. As noted in the previous section, such a device is called a heat
engine, and one is shown schematically in Figure 9.33(b). Gasoline and diesel engines, jet engines, and steam turbines are all
heat engines that do work by using part of the heat transfer from some source. Heat transfer from the hot object (or hot reservoir)
is denoted as Qh , while heat transfer into the cold object (or cold reservoir) is Qc , and the work done by the engine is W . The
temperatures of the hot and cold reservoirs are Th and Tc , respectively.
254 Chapter 9 | Thermal Physics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12