given. In part (b), we rearrange the definition of current and use the given values of charge and current to find the time
required.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values for charge and time into the definition of current gives
(10.37)I = ΔQ
Δt = 720 C
4.00 s = 180 C/s
= 180 A.
Discussion for (a)
This large value for current illustrates the fact that a large charge is moved in a small amount of time. The currents in these
“starter motors” are fairly large because large frictional forces need to be overcome when setting something in motion.
Solution for (b)
Solving the relationship I = ΔQ / Δt for time Δt , and entering the known values for charge and current gives
(10.38)Δt = ΔQ
I = 1.00 C
0.300×10-3 C/s
= 3.33×103 s.
Discussion for (b)
This time is slightly less than an hour. The small current used by the hand-held calculator takes a much longer time to move
a smaller charge than the large current of the truck starter. So why can we operate our calculators only seconds after turning
them on? It’s because calculators require very little energy. Such small current and energy demands allow handheld
calculators to operate from solar cells or to get many hours of use out of small batteries. Remember, calculators do not have
moving parts in the same way that a truck engine has with cylinders and pistons, so the technology requires smaller
currents.
Figure 10.33 shows a simple circuit and the standard schematic representation of a battery, conducting path, and load (a
resistor). Schematics are very useful in visualizing the main features of a circuit. A single schematic can represent a wide variety
of situations. The schematic in Figure 10.33 (b), for example, can represent anything from a truck battery connected to a
headlight lighting the street in front of the truck to a small battery connected to a penlight lighting a keyhole in a door. Such
schematics are useful because the analysis is the same for a wide variety of situations. We need to understand a few schematics
to apply the concepts and analysis to many more situations.
Figure 10.33 (a) A simple electric circuit. A closed path for current to flow through is supplied by conducting wires connecting a load to the terminals of
a battery. (b) In this schematic, the battery is represented by the two parallel red lines, conducting wires are shown as straight lines, and the zigzag
represents the load. The schematic represents a wide variety of similar circuits.
Note that the direction of current flow in Figure 10.33 is from positive to negative. The direction of conventional current is the
Chapter 10 | Electricity 311