classical physics:
conversion factor:
derived units:
English units:
fundamental units:
kilogram:
law:
meter:
metric system:
model:
modern physics:
order of magnitude:
physical quantity :
physics:
quantum mechanics:
relativity:
scientific method:
Nonstandard Units
While there are numerous types of units that we are all familiar with, there are others that are much more obscure. For
example, a firkin is a unit of volume that was once used to measure beer. One firkin equals about 34 liters. To learn more
about nonstandard units, use a dictionary or encyclopedia to research different “weights and measures.” Take note of any
unusual units, such as a barleycorn, that are not listed in the text. Think about how the unit is defined and state its
relationship to SI units.
Check Your Understanding
Some hummingbirds beat their wings more than 50 times per second. A scientist is measuring the time it takes for a
hummingbird to beat its wings once. Which fundamental unit should the scientist use to describe the measurement? Which
factor of 10 is the scientist likely to use to describe the motion precisely? Identify the metric prefix that corresponds to this
factor of 10.
Solution
The scientist will measure the time between each movement using the fundamental unit of seconds. Because the wings beat
so fast, the scientist will probably need to measure in milliseconds, or 10−3 seconds. (50 beats per second corresponds to
20 milliseconds per beat.)
Check Your Understanding
One cubic centimeter is equal to one milliliter. What does this tell you about the different units in the SI metric system?
Solution
The fundamental unit of length (meter) is probably used to create the derived unit of volume (liter). The measure of a milliliter
is dependent on the measure of a centimeter.
Glossary
physics that was developed from the Renaissance to the end of the 19th century
a ratio expressing how many of one unit are equal to another unit
units that can be calculated using algebraic combinations of the fundamental units
system of measurement used in the United States; includes units of measurement such as feet, gallons, and
pounds
units that can only be expressed relative to the procedure used to measure them
the SI unit for mass, abbreviated (kg)
a description, using concise language or a mathematical formula, a generalized pattern in nature that is supported by
scientific evidence and repeated experiments
the SI unit for length, abbreviated (m)
a system in which values can be calculated in factors of 10
representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly
the study of relativity, quantum mechanics, or both
refers to the size of a quantity as it relates to a power of 10
a characteristic or property of an object that can be measured or calculated from other measurements
the science concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time; it is especially interested
in what fundamental mechanisms underlie every phenomenon
the study of objects smaller than can be seen with a microscope
the study of objects moving at speeds greater than about 1% of the speed of light, or of objects being affected by a
strong gravitational field
a method that typically begins with an observation and question that the scientist will research; next, the
scientist typically performs some research about the topic and then devises a hypothesis; then, the scientist will test the
hypothesis by performing an experiment; finally, the scientist analyzes the results of the experiment and draws a
conclusion
Chapter 1 | Introduction 15