second:
SI units :
theory:
units :
the SI unit for time, abbreviated (s)
the international system of units that scientists in most countries have agreed to use; includes units such as meters,
liters, and grams
an explanation for patterns in nature that is supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various
groups of researchers
a standard used for expressing and comparing measurements
Section Summary
1.1 Physics: An Introduction
• Science seeks to discover and describe the underlying order and simplicity in nature.
• Physics is the most basic of the sciences, concerning itself with energy, matter, space and time, and their interactions.
• Scientific laws and theories express the general truths of nature and the body of knowledge they encompass. These laws
of nature are rules that all natural processes appear to follow.
1.2 Physical Quantities and Units
• Physical quantities are a characteristic or property of an object that can be measured or calculated from other
measurements.
• Units are standards for expressing and comparing the measurement of physical quantities. All units can be expressed as
combinations of four fundamental units.
• The four fundamental units we will use in this text are the meter (for length), the kilogram (for mass), the second (for time),
and the ampere (for electric current). These units are part of the metric system, which uses powers of 10 to relate quantities
over the vast ranges encountered in nature.
• The four fundamental units are abbreviated as follows: meter, m; kilogram, kg; second, s; and ampere, A. The metric
system also uses a standard set of prefixes to denote each order of magnitude greater than or lesser than the fundamental
unit itself.
• Unit conversions involve changing a value expressed in one type of unit to another type of unit. This is done by using
conversion factors, which are ratios relating equal quantities of different units.
Conceptual Questions
1.1 Physics: An Introduction
1. Models are particularly useful in relativity and quantum mechanics, where conditions are outside those normally encountered
by humans. What is a model?
2. How does a model differ from a theory?
3. If two different theories describe experimental observations equally well, can one be said to be more valid than the other
(assuming both use accepted rules of logic)?
4. What determines the validity of a theory?
5. Certain criteria must be satisfied if a measurement or observation is to be believed. Will the criteria necessarily be as strict for
an expected result as for an unexpected result?
6. Can the validity of a model be limited, or must it be universally valid? How does this compare to the required validity of a
theory or a law?
7. Classical physics is a good approximation to modern physics under certain circumstances. What are they?
8. When is it necessary to use relativistic quantum mechanics?
9. Can classical physics be used to accurately describe a satellite moving at a speed of 7500 m/s? Explain why or why not.
1.2 Physical Quantities and Units
10. Identify some advantages of metric, or SI units.
11. Identify some advantages and disadvantages of English, or imperial units.
12. How many fundamental units are there? What is the key difference between derived and fundamental units?
16 Chapter 1 | Introduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12