the Earth, from the tiny sizes of sub-nuclear particles to the vast distance to the edges of the known universe, from the force
exerted by a jumping flea to the force between Earth and the Sun, there are enough factors of 10 to challenge the imagination of
even the most experienced scientist. Giving numerical values for physical quantities and equations for physical principles allows
us to understand nature much more deeply than does qualitative description alone. To comprehend these vast ranges, we must
also have accepted units in which to express them. And we shall find that (even in the potentially mundane discussion of meters,
kilograms, and seconds) a profound simplicity of nature appears—all physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of
only four fundamental physical quantities: length, mass, time, and electric current.
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other
measurements. For example, we define distance and time by specifying methods for measuring them, whereas we define
average speed by stating that it is calculated as distance traveled divided by time of travel.
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms of units, which are standardized values. For example, the length of
a race, which is a physical quantity, can be expressed in units of meters (for sprinters) or kilometers (for distance runners).
Without standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and compare measured values in a meaningful
way. (See Figure 1.16.)
Figure 1.16 Distances given in unknown units are maddeningly useless.
There are two major systems of units used in the world: SI units (also known as the metric system) and English units (also
known as the customary or imperial system). English units were historically used in nations once ruled by the British Empire
and are still widely used in the United States. Virtually every other country in the world now uses SI units as the standard; the
metric system is also the standard system agreed upon by scientists and mathematicians. The acronym “SI” is derived from the
French Système International.
SI Units: Fundamental and Derived Units
Table 1.1 gives the fundamental SI units that are used throughout this textbook. This text uses non-SI units in a few applications
where they are in very common use, such as the measurement of blood pressure in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). Whenever
non-SI units are discussed, they will be tied to SI units through conversions.
Table 1.1 Fundamental SI Units
Length Mass Time Electric Current
meter (m) kilogram (kg) second (s) ampere (A)
It is an intriguing fact that some physical quantities are more fundamental than others and that the most fundamental physical
quantities can be defined only in terms of the procedure used to measure them. The units in which they are measured are thus
called fundamental units. In this textbook, the fundamental physical quantities are taken to be length, mass, time, and electric
current. (Note that electric current will not be introduced until much later in this text.) All other physical quantities, such as force
and electric charge, can be expressed as algebraic combinations of length, mass, time, and current (for example, speed is length
divided by time); these units are called derived units.
Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
The Second
The SI unit for time, the second(abbreviated s), has a long history. For many years it was defined as 1/86,400 of a mean solar
day. More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain greater accuracy and to define the second in terms of a non-varying, or
constant, physical phenomenon (because the solar day is getting longer due to very gradual slowing of the Earth’s rotation).
Cesium atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way, and these vibrations can be readily observed and counted. In 1967
the second was redefined as the time required for 9,192,631,770 of these vibrations. (See Figure 1.17.) Accuracy in the
fundamental units is essential, because all measurements are ultimately expressed in terms of fundamental units and can be no
more accurate than are the fundamental units themselves.
Chapter 1 | Introduction 11