Figure 1.2 The flight formations of migratory birds such as Canada geese are governed by the laws of physics. (credit: David Merrett)
The physical universe is enormously complex in its detail. Every day, each of us observes a great variety of objects and
phenomena. Over the centuries, the curiosity of the human race has led us collectively to explore and catalog a tremendous
wealth of information. From the flight of birds to the colors of flowers, from lightning to gravity, from quarks to clusters of galaxies,
from the flow of time to the mystery of the creation of the universe, we have asked questions and assembled huge arrays of
facts. In the face of all these details, we have discovered that a surprisingly small and unified set of physical laws can explain
what we observe. As humans, we make generalizations and seek order. We have found that nature is remarkably cooperative—it
exhibits the underlying order and simplicity we so value.
It is the underlying order of nature that makes science in general, and physics in particular, so enjoyable to study. For example,
what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in common? Both contain energy that can be converted to other forms. The law of
conservation of energy (which says that energy can change form but is never lost) ties together such topics as food calories,
batteries, heat, light, and watch springs. Understanding this law makes it easier to learn about the various forms energy takes
and how they relate to one another. Apparently unrelated topics are connected through broadly applicable physical laws,
permitting an understanding beyond just the memorization of lists of facts.
The unifying aspect of physical laws and the basic simplicity of nature form the underlying themes of this text. In learning to apply
these laws, you will, of course, study the most important topics in physics. More importantly, you will gain analytical abilities that
will enable you to apply these laws far beyond the scope of what can be included in a single book. These analytical skills will help
you to excel academically, and they will also help you to think critically in any professional career you choose to pursue. This
module discusses the realm of physics (to define what physics is), some applications of physics (to illustrate its relevance to
other disciplines), and more precisely what constitutes a physical law (to illuminate the importance of experimentation to theory).
Science and the Realm of Physics
Science consists of the theories and laws that are the general truths of nature as well as the body of knowledge they encompass.
Scientists are continually trying to expand this body of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the laws that describe it.
Physics is concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time, and it is especially interested in what
fundamental mechanisms underlie every phenomenon. The concern for describing the basic phenomena in nature essentially
defines the realm of physics.
Physics aims to describe the function of everything around us, from the movement of tiny charged particles to the motion of
people, cars, and spaceships. In fact, almost everything around you can be described quite accurately by the laws of physics.
Consider a smart phone (Figure 1.3). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various circuits inside the device. This
knowledge helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when building the smart phone. Next, consider a
GPS system. Physics describes the relationship between the speed of an object, the distance over which it travels, and the time
it takes to travel that distance. When you use a GPS device in a vehicle, it utilizes these physics equations to determine the
travel time from one location to another.
4 Chapter 1 | Introduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12