Figure 1.3 The Apple “iPhone” is a common smart phone with a GPS function. Physics describes the way that electricity flows through the circuits of
this device. Engineers use their knowledge of physics to construct an iPhone with features that consumers will enjoy. One specific feature of an iPhone
is the GPS function. GPS uses physics equations to determine the driving time between two locations on a map. (credit: @gletham GIS, Social, Mobile
Tech Images)
Applications of Physics
You need not be a scientist to use physics. On the contrary, knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in
nonscientific professions. It can help you understand how microwave ovens work, why metals should not be put into them, and
why they might affect pacemakers. (See Figure 1.4 and Figure 1.5.) Physics allows you to understand the hazards of radiation
and rationally evaluate these hazards more easily. Physics also explains the reason why a black car radiator helps remove heat
in a car engine, and it explains why a white roof helps keep the inside of a house cool. Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignition
system as well as the transmission of electrical signals through our body’s nervous system are much easier to understand when
you think about them in terms of basic physics.
Physics is the foundation of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Chemistry, for example—since it deals
with the interactions of atoms and molecules—is rooted in atomic and molecular physics. Most branches of engineering are
applied physics. In architecture, physics is at the heart of structural stability, and is involved in the acoustics, heating, lighting,
and cooling of buildings. Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and
heat transfer in the Earth. Some disciplines, such as biophysics and geophysics, are hybrids of physics and other disciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological sciences. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the properties of cell walls
and cell membranes (Figure 1.6 and Figure 1.7). On the macroscopic level, it can explain the heat, work, and power associated
with the human body. Physics is involved in medical diagnostics, such as x-rays, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and
ultrasonic blood flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes directly involves physics; for example, cancer radiotherapy
uses ionizing radiation. Physics can also explain sensory phenomena, such as how musical instruments make sound, how the
eye detects color, and how lasers can transmit information.
It is not necessary to formally study all applications of physics. What is most useful is knowledge of the basic laws of physics and
a skill in the analytical methods for applying them. The study of physics also can improve your problem-solving skills.
Furthermore, physics has retained the most basic aspects of science, so it is used by all of the sciences, and the study of
physics makes other sciences easier to understand.
Figure 1.4 The laws of physics help us understand how common appliances work. For example, the laws of physics can help explain how microwave
ovens heat up food, and they also help us understand why it is dangerous to place metal objects in a microwave oven. (credit: MoneyBlogNewz)
Chapter 1 | Introduction 5