picture phenomena we cannot see. In fact, new instrumentation has allowed us in recent years to actually “picture” the atom.
Limits on the Laws of Classical Physics
For the laws of classical physics to apply, the following criteria must be met: Matter must be moving at speeds less than
about 1% of the speed of light, the objects dealt with must be large enough to be seen with a microscope, and only weak
gravitational fields (such as the field generated by the Earth) can be involved.
Figure 1.14 Using a scanning tunneling microscope (STM), scientists can see the individual atoms that compose this sheet of gold. (credit:
Erwinrossen)
Some of the most spectacular advances in science have been made in modern physics. Many of the laws of classical physics
have been modified or rejected, and revolutionary changes in technology, society, and our view of the universe have resulted.
Like science fiction, modern physics is filled with fascinating objects beyond our normal experiences, but it has the advantage
over science fiction of being very real. Why, then, is the majority of this text devoted to topics of classical physics? There are two
main reasons: Classical physics gives an extremely accurate description of the universe under a wide range of everyday
circumstances, and knowledge of classical physics is necessary to understand modern physics.
Modern physics itself consists of the two revolutionary theories, relativity and quantum mechanics. These theories deal with the
very fast and the very small, respectively. Relativity must be used whenever an object is traveling at greater than about 1% of
the speed of light or experiences a strong gravitational field such as that near the Sun. Quantum mechanics must be used for
objects smaller than can be seen with a microscope. The combination of these two theories is relativistic quantum mechanics,
and it describes the behavior of small objects traveling at high speeds or experiencing a strong gravitational field. Relativistic
quantum mechanics is the best universally applicable theory we have. Because of its mathematical complexity, it is used only
when necessary, and the other theories are used whenever they will produce sufficiently accurate results.
Check Your Understanding
A friend tells you he has learned about a new law of nature. What can you know about the information even before your
friend describes the law? How would the information be different if your friend told you he had learned about a scientific
theory rather than a law?
Solution
Without knowing the details of the law, you can still infer that the information your friend has learned conforms to the
requirements of all laws of nature: it will be a concise description of the universe around us; a statement of the underlying
rules that all natural processes follow. If the information had been a theory, you would be able to infer that the information will
be a large-scale, broadly applicable generalization.
1.2 Physical Quantities and Units
Figure 1.15 The distance from Earth to the Moon may seem immense, but it is just a tiny fraction of the distances from Earth to other celestial bodies.
(credit: NASA)
The range of objects and phenomena studied in physics is immense. From the incredibly short lifetime of a nucleus to the age of
10 Chapter 1 | Introduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12