Figure 1.17 An atomic clock such as this one uses the vibrations of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of better than a microsecond per year.
The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on such clocks. This image is looking down from the top of an atomic fountain nearly 30 feet tall!
(credit: Steve Jurvetson/Flickr)
The Meter
The SI unit for length is the meter (abbreviated m); its definition has also changed over time to become more accurate and
precise. The meter was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the equator to the North Pole. This
measurement was improved in 1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance between two engraved lines on a platinum-iridium
bar now kept near Paris. By 1960, it had become possible to define the meter even more accurately in terms of the wavelength
of light, so it was again redefined as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of orange light emitted by krypton atoms. In 1983, the meter was
given its present definition (partly for greater accuracy) as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second.
(See Figure 1.18.) This change defines the speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 meters per second. The length of the meter
will change if the speed of light is someday measured with greater accuracy.
Figure 1.18 The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Distance traveled is speed multiplied by
time.
The Kilogram
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram (abbreviated kg); it is currently defined to be the mass of a platinum-iridium cylinder kept
with the old meter standard at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. Exact replicas of the standard
kilogram are also kept at the United States’ National Institute of Standards and Technology, or NIST, located in Gaithersburg,
Maryland outside of Washington D.C., and at other locations around the world. The determination of all other masses can be
ultimately traced to a comparison with the standard mass. At the November 2018 meeting of the International Committee for
Weights and Measures, a proposed re-definition of kilogram was approved. This proposal (effective May 2019) re-defines the
kilogram by precisely fixing the numerical value of Planck's constant ( h ) to be exactly 6.62607015×10-34 kg m2 s-1 . This is
similar to definition of the meter by fixing the speed of light ( c ), and we will see the importance of this re-definition in a later unit
on quantum mechanics.
Electric current and its accompanying unit, the ampere, will be introduced when electricity and magnetism are covered. The initial
modules in this textbook are concerned with mechanics, fluids, heat, and waves. In these subjects all pertinent physical
quantities can be expressed in terms of the fundamental units of length, mass, and time.
Metric Prefixes
SI units are part of the metric system. The metric system is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations because the
units are categorized by factors of 10. Table 1.2 gives metric prefixes and symbols used to denote various factors of 10.
Metric systems have the advantage that conversions of units involve only powers of 10. There are 100 centimeters in a meter,
1000 meters in a kilometer, and so on. In nonmetric systems, such as the system of U.S. customary units, the relationships are
not as simple—there are 12 inches in a foot, 5280 feet in a mile, and so on. Another advantage of the metric system is that the
same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of values simply by using an appropriate metric prefix. For example,
distances in meters are suitable in construction, while distances in kilometers are appropriate for air travel, and the tiny measure
of nanometers are convenient in optical design. With the metric system there is no need to invent new units for particular
applications.
The term order of magnitude refers to the scale of a value expressed in the metric system. Each power of 10 in the metric
12 Chapter 1 | Introduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12