Figure 1.8 Isaac Newton (1642–1727) was very reluctant to publish his revolutionary work and had to be convinced to do so. In his later years, he
stepped down from his academic post and became exchequer of the Royal Mint. He took this post seriously, inventing reeding (or creating ridges) on
the edge of coins to prevent unscrupulous people from trimming the silver off of them before using them as currency. (credit: Arthur Shuster and Arthur
E. Shipley: Britain’s Heritage of Science. London, 1917.)
Figure 1.9 Marie Curie (1867–1934) sacrificed monetary assets to help finance her early research and damaged her physical well-being with radiation
exposure. She is the only person to win Nobel prizes in both physics and chemistry. One of her daughters also won a Nobel Prize. (credit: Wikimedia
Commons)
We all are curious to some extent. We look around, make generalizations, and try to understand what we see—for example, we
look up and wonder whether one type of cloud signals an oncoming storm. As we become serious about exploring nature, we
become more organized and formal in collecting and analyzing data. We attempt greater precision, perform controlled
experiments (if we can), and write down ideas about how the data may be organized and unified. We then formulate models,
theories, and laws based on the data we have collected and analyzed to generalize and communicate the results of these
experiments.
A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly. While a model is justified
with experimental proof, it is only accurate under limited situations. An example is the planetary model of the atom in which
electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus, analogous to the way planets orbit the Sun. (See Figure 1.10.) We cannot observe
electron orbits directly, but the mental image helps explain the observations we can make, such as the emission of light from hot
gases (atomic spectra). Physicists use models for a variety of purposes. For example, models can help physicists analyze a
scenario and perform a calculation, or they can be used to represent a situation in the form of a computer simulation. A theory is
an explanation for patterns in nature that is supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various groups of
researchers. Some theories include models to help visualize phenomena, whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, for
example, does not require a model or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses. The
kinetic theory of gases, on the other hand, is a model in which a gas is viewed as being composed of atoms and molecules.
Atoms and molecules are too small to be observed directly with our senses—thus, we picture them mentally to understand what
our instruments tell us about the behavior of gases.
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature that is supported by scientific evidence and repeated
experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation. Laws and theories are similar in that
they are both scientific statements that result from a tested hypothesis and are supported by scientific evidence. However, the
Chapter 1 | Introduction 7