designation law is reserved for a concise and very general statement that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that
energy is conserved during any process, or Newton’s second law of motion, which relates force, mass, and acceleration by the
simple equation F = ma . A theory, in contrast, is a less concise statement of observed phenomena. For example, the Theory of
Evolution and the Theory of Relativity cannot be expressed concisely enough to be considered a law. The biggest difference
between a law and a theory is that a theory is much more complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action, whereas a
theory explains an entire group of related phenomena. And, whereas a law is a postulate that forms the foundation of the
scientific method, a theory is the end result of that process.
Less broadly applicable statements are usually called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is applicable only in fluids),
but the distinction between laws and principles often is not carefully made.
Figure 1.10 What is a model? This planetary model of the atom shows electrons orbiting the nucleus. It is a drawing that we use to form a mental
image of the atom that we cannot see directly with our eyes because it is too small.
Models, Theories, and Laws
Models, theories, and laws are used to help scientists analyze the data they have already collected. However, often after a
model, theory, or law has been developed, it points scientists toward new discoveries they would not otherwise have made.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimes imply the existence of objects or phenomena as yet unobserved. These
predictions are remarkable triumphs and tributes to the power of science. It is the underlying order in the universe that enables
scientists to make such spectacular predictions. However, if experiment does not verify our predictions, then the theory or law is
wrong, no matter how elegant or convenient it is. Laws can never be known with absolute certainty because it is impossible to
perform every imaginable experiment in order to confirm a law in every possible scenario. Physicists operate under the
assumption that all scientific laws and theories are valid until a counterexample is observed. If a good-quality, verifiable
experiment contradicts a well-established law, then the law must be modified or overthrown completely.
The study of science in general and physics in particular is an adventure much like the exploration of uncharted ocean.
Discoveries are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; and the beauty of the physical universe is made more sublime
for the insights gained.
The Scientific Method
As scientists inquire and gather information about the world, they follow a process called the scientific method. This
process typically begins with an observation and question that the scientist will research. Next, the scientist typically
performs some research about the topic and then devises a hypothesis. Then, the scientist will test the hypothesis by
performing an experiment. Finally, the scientist analyzes the results of the experiment and draws a conclusion. Note that the
scientific method can be applied to many situations that are not limited to science, and this method can be modified to suit
the situation.
Consider an example. Let us say that you try to turn on your car, but it will not start. You undoubtedly wonder: Why will the
car not start? You can follow a scientific method to answer this question. First off, you may perform some research to
determine a variety of reasons why the car will not start. Next, you will state a hypothesis. For example, you may believe that
the car is not starting because it has no engine oil. To test this, you open the hood of the car and examine the oil level. You
observe that the oil is at an acceptable level, and you thus conclude that the oil level is not contributing to your car issue. To
troubleshoot the issue further, you may devise a new hypothesis to test and then repeat the process again.
The Evolution of Natural Philosophy into Modern Physics
Physics was not always a separate and distinct discipline. It remains connected to other sciences to this day. The word physics
comes from Greek, meaning nature. The study of nature came to be called “natural philosophy.” From ancient times through the
Renaissance, natural philosophy encompassed many fields, including astronomy, biology, chemistry, physics, mathematics, and
medicine. Over the last few centuries, the growth of knowledge has resulted in ever-increasing specialization and branching of
natural philosophy into separate fields, with physics retaining the most basic facets. (See Figure 1.11, Figure 1.12, and Figure
1.13.) Physics as it developed from the Renaissance to the end of the 19th century is called classical physics. It was
transformed into modern physics by revolutionary discoveries made starting at the beginning of the 20th century.
8 Chapter 1 | Introduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12