fact be solved by other methods, but the solutions presented above are the shortest.
With the basics of kinematics established, we can go on to many other interesting examples and applications. In the process of
developing kinematics, we have also glimpsed a general approach to problem solving that produces both correct answers and
insights into physical relationships.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Breaking News
We have been using SI units of meters per second squared to describe some examples of acceleration of cars, runners, and
trains. To achieve a better feel for these numbers, one can measure the braking acceleration of a car doing a slow (and
safe) stop. Recall that, for average acceleration, a- = Δv / Δt . While traveling in a car, slowly apply the brakes as you
come up to a stop sign. Have a passenger note the initial speed in miles per hour and the time taken (in seconds) to stop.
From this, calculate the acceleration in miles per hour per second. Convert this to meters per second squared and compare
with other accelerations mentioned in this chapter. Calculate the distance traveled in braking.
Check Your Understanding
A manned rocket accelerates at a rate of 20 m/s2 during launch. How long does it take the rocket reach a velocity of 400
m/s?
Solution
To answer this, choose an equation that allows you to solve for time t , given only a , v0 , and v .
(2.61)v = v0 + at
Rearrange to solve for t .
(2.62)t = v − v
a = 400 m/s − 0 m/s
20 m/s2 = 20 s
Conceptual Questions
Exercise 2.1
In a constant-acceleration motion, how does the position change? How does the velocity change?
Exercise 2.2
Describe the relationship between the position and the velocity in a constant-acceleration motion.
Exercise 2.3
Describe the relationship between the velocity and the acceleration in a constant-acceleration motion.
Exercise 2.4
In a constant-acceleration motion starting from rest, how does the distance traveled change with the duration of motion? If
the motion continues for double the time (total), how much does the distance traveled increase (total)?
2.6 Falling Objects
Falling objects form an interesting class of motion problems. For example, we can estimate the depth of a vertical mine shaft by
dropping a rock into it and listening for the rock to hit the bottom. By applying the kinematics developed so far to falling objects,
we can examine some interesting situations and learn much about gravity in the process.
Gravity
The most remarkable and unexpected fact about falling objects is that, if air resistance and friction are negligible, then in a given
location all objects fall toward the center of Earth with the same constant acceleration, independent of their mass. This
experimentally determined fact is unexpected, because we are so accustomed to the effects of air resistance and friction that we
44 Chapter 2 | Kinematics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12