v2 = v0
2 + 2a(x − x0)
• In vertical motion, y is substituted for x .
2.6 Falling Objects
• An object in free-fall experiences constant acceleration if air resistance is negligible.
• On Earth, all free-falling objects have an acceleration due to gravity g , which averages
g = 9.80 m/s2.
• Whether the acceleration a should be taken as +g or −g is determined by your choice of coordinate system. If you
choose the upward direction as positive, a = −g = −9.80 m/s2 is negative. In the opposite case,
a = +g = 9.80 m/s2 is positive. Since acceleration is constant, the kinematic equations above can be applied with the
appropriate +g or −g substituted for a .
• For objects in free-fall, up is normally taken as positive for displacement, velocity, and acceleration.
2.7 Projectile Motion
• Projectile motion is the motion of an object through the air that is subject only to the acceleration of gravity.
• The most important fact regarding projectile motion is that motions along vertical direction and the horizontal direction are
independent.
• The maximum horizontal distance traveled by a projectile is called the range. The range R of a projectile on level ground
launched at an angle θ0 above the horizontal with initial speed v0 is given by
R =
v0
2 sin 2θ0
g .
2.8 Centripetal Acceleration
• Centripetal acceleration ac is the acceleration experienced while in uniform circular motion. It always points toward the
center of rotation. It is perpendicular to the linear velocity v and has the magnitude
ac = v2
r .
• The unit of centripetal acceleration is m / s2 .
Conceptual Questions
2.1 Displacement
1. Give an example in which there are clear distinctions among distance traveled, displacement, and magnitude of displacement.
Specifically identify each quantity in your example.
2. Under what circumstances does distance traveled equal magnitude of displacement? What is the only case in which
magnitude of displacement and displacement are exactly the same?
3. Bacteria move back and forth by using their flagella (structures that look like little tails). Speeds of up to
50 μm/s ⎛
⎝50×10−6 m/s⎞
⎠ have been observed. The total distance traveled by a bacterium is large for its size, while its
displacement is small. Why is this?
2.2 Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems
4. A student writes, “A bird that is diving for prey has a speed of − 10 m / s .” What is wrong with the student’s statement? What
has the student actually described? Explain.
5. What is the speed of the bird in Exercise 2.4?
6. Acceleration is the change in velocity over time. Given this information, is acceleration a vector or a scalar quantity? Explain.
7. A weather forecast states that the temperature is predicted to be −5ºC the following day. Is this temperature a vector or a
scalar quantity? Explain.
2.3 Time, Velocity, and Speed
8. Give an example (but not one from the text) of a device used to measure time and identify what change in that device
indicates a change in time.
58 Chapter 2 | Kinematics
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12