to zero, so the net force on it is zero ( Fnet = 0 ), which means the net work done on the weight is also zero ( Wnet = Fnet d ;
the applied upward force does positive work, while the downward gravitational force does negative work).
While this is a correct description (the negative work done by the gravity cancels out the positive work done by the applied force),
this description misses something. Specifically, you can see that this weight that has been lifted by 1 meter does have more
energy than a weight that was resting on the floor. This is how you can see it: if you let go of the weight (after removing the
table), as the weight originally at 1-meter height reaches the floor, it gains a substantial kinetic energy as it continues to be pulled
by gravity. Rather than saying that this kinetic energy simply appeared as the weight fell through the 1-meter height, we opt for
the description that this weight already had this energy, when it was at rest at the 1-meter height, just in a form that was not
kinetic energy. We call this energy associated with the height of objects the gravitational potential energy, PEg . And in this
example, the energy originally came from the work done by the applied force—rather than considering positive work done by the
applied force to be cancelled out by the negative work done by the gravity, we say that this positive work done is stored as
positive PEg .
This phenomenon of potential energy turns out to be quite general and goes beyond the gravitational force. There are other
forces in nature where negative work done by these forces turns into positive potential energy. We call these forces
conservative forces, which will be the subject of the next section. For the purpose of this section, following is the quick
derivation of formula for PEg (everything in terms of symbols now). In lifting the weight of mass m through a height h slowly,
you have to apply a force equal to its weight, mg . So the work done is W = Fd = mgh , and since it's this work done that is
stored as gravitational potential energy, the gravitational potential energy must be:
(4.30)PEg = mgh.
Converting Between Potential Energy and Kinetic Energy
Gravitational potential energy may be converted to other forms of energy, such as kinetic energy. If we release the mass,
gravitational force will do an amount of work equal to mgh on it, thereby increasing its kinetic energy by that same amount (by
the work-energy theorem). We will find it more useful to consider just the conversion of PEg to KE without explicitly
considering the intermediate step of work. (See Example 4.8.) This shortcut makes it is easier to solve problems using energy (if
possible) rather than explicitly using forces.
Figure 4.5 (a) The work done to lift the weight is stored in the mass-Earth system as gravitational potential energy. (b) As the weight moves downward,
this gravitational potential energy is transferred to the cuckoo clock.
More precisely, we define the change in gravitational potential energy ΔPEg to be
Chapter 4 | Work and Energy 109