falling to the ground, we expect their momenta to have great effects in the resulting collisions. Generally, momentum implies a
tendency to continue on course—to move in the same direction—and is associated with great mass and speed.
Momentum, like energy, is important because it is conserved. Only a few physical quantities are conserved in nature, and
studying them yields fundamental insight into how nature works, as we shall see in our study of momentum.
(This media type is not supported in this reader. Click to open media in browser.) (http://legacy.cnx.org/content/m42155/
1.9/#concept-trailer-collisions)
5.1 Linear Momentum and Force
Linear Momentum
The scientific definition of linear momentum is consistent with most people’s intuitive understanding of momentum: a large, fast-
moving object has greater momentum than a smaller, slower object. Linear momentum is defined as the product of a system’s
mass multiplied by its velocity. In symbols, linear momentum is expressed as
(5.1)p = mv
Momentum is directly proportional to the object’s mass and also its velocity. Thus the greater an object’s mass or the greater its
velocity, the greater its momentum. Momentum p is a vector having the same direction as the velocity v . The SI unit for
momentum is kg · m/s .
Linear Momentum
Linear momentum is defined as the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity:
(5.2)p = mv.
Example 5.1 Calculating Momentum: A Football Player and a Football
(a) Calculate the momentum of a 110-kg football player running at 8.00 m/s. (b) Compare the player’s momentum with the
momentum of a hard-thrown 0.410-kg football that has a speed of 25.0 m/s.
Strategy
No information is given regarding direction, and so we can calculate only the magnitude of the momentum, p . (As usual, a
symbol that is in italics is a magnitude, whereas one that is italicized and is boldfaced or has an arrow is a vector.) In both
parts of this example, the magnitude of momentum can be calculated directly from the definition of momentum given in the
equation, which becomes
(5.3)p = mv
when only magnitudes are considered.
Solution for (a)
To determine the momentum of the player, substitute the known values for the player’s mass and speed into the equation.
(5.4)pplayer = ⎛
⎝110 kg⎞
⎠(8.00 m/s) = 880 kg · m/s
Solution for (b)
To determine the momentum of the ball, substitute the known values for the ball’s mass and speed into the equation.
(5.5)pball = ⎛
⎝0.410 kg⎞
⎠(25.0 m/s) = 10.3 kg · m/s
The ratio of the player’s momentum to that of the ball is
(5.6)pplayer
pball = 880
10.3 = 85.9.
Discussion
Although the ball has greater velocity, the player has a much greater mass. Thus the momentum of the player is much
greater than the momentum of the football, as you might guess. As a result, the player’s motion is only slightly affected if he
catches the ball. We shall quantify what happens in such collisions in terms of momentum in later sections.
Momentum and Newton’s Second Law
The importance of momentum, unlike the importance of energy, was recognized early in the development of classical physics.
Momentum was deemed so important that it was called the “quantity of motion.” Newton actually stated his second law of
motion in terms of momentum: The net external force equals the change in momentum of a system divided by the time over
128 Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12