(4.57)
vf = (2)(PEsi − mghf)
m = 0.0472 J
0.100 kg = 0.687 m / s
Discussion
Another way to solve this problem is to realize that the car’s kinetic energy before it goes up the slope is converted partly to
potential energy—that is, to take the final conditions in part (a) to be the initial conditions in part (b).
Note that, for conservative forces, we do not directly calculate the work they do; rather, we consider their effects through their
corresponding potential energies, just as we did in Example 4.9. Note also that we do not consider details of the path
taken—only the starting and ending points are important (as long as the path is not impossible). This assumption is usually a
tremendous simplification, because the path may be complicated and forces may vary along the way.
Conservation of Total Energy
Energy, as we have noted, is conserved, making it one of the most important physical quantities in nature. The law of
conservation of energy can be stated as follows:
Total energy is constant in any process. It may change in form or be transferred from one system to another, but the total
remains the same.
We have explored some forms of energy and some ways it can be transferred from one system to another, in the case of work
done by conservative forces transforming between potential energy and kinetic energy. Together, these make up the mechanical
energy (KE + PE) , and the mechanical energy is not always conserved, because it can be transformed into other forms of
energy through work done by non-conservative forces. Here, we list some of the many forms energy can take.
Some of the Many Forms of Energy
Here are some of the many forms of energy. You probably have heard of some of these before; many of these will be covered in
later chapters, but let us detail a few here. Electrical energy is a common form that is converted to many other forms and does
work in a wide range of practical situations. Fuels, such as gasoline and food, carry chemical energy that can be transferred to
a system through oxidation. Chemical fuel can also produce electrical energy, such as in batteries. Batteries can in turn produce
light, which is a very pure form of energy. Most energy sources on Earth are in fact stored energy from the energy we receive
from the Sun. We sometimes refer to this as radiant energy, or electromagnetic radiation, which includes visible light, infrared,
and ultraviolet radiation. Nuclear energy comes from processes that convert measurable amounts of mass into energy. Nuclear
energy is transformed into the energy of sunlight, into electrical energy in power plants, and into the energy of the heat transfer
and blast in weapons. Atoms and molecules inside all objects are in random motion. This internal mechanical energy from the
random motions is called thermal energy, because it is related to the temperature of the object. These and all other forms of
energy can be converted into one another and can do work.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Energy Problems
You will find the following problem-solving strategies useful whenever you deal with energy. The strategies help in organizing
and reinforcing energy concepts. In fact, they are used in the examples presented in this chapter. The familiar general
problem-solving strategies presented earlier—involving identifying physical principles, knowns, and unknowns, checking
units, and so on—continue to be relevant here.
Step 1. Determine the system of interest and identify what information is given and what quantity is to be calculated. A
sketch will help.
Step 2. Examine all the forces involved and determine whether you know or are given the potential energy from the work
done by the forces. Then use step 3 or step 4.
Step 3. If you know the potential energies for the forces that enter into the problem, then forces are all conservative, and you
can apply conservation of mechanical energy simply in terms of potential and kinetic energy. Use
KEi + PEi = KEf + PEf. or ΔKE + ΔPE = 0 as starting point and use formulas for kinetic energy and potential
energies.
Step 4. If you know that the total mechanical energy changes (usually there will be some hint of work done by non-
conservative forces, energy input from other forms of energy, or even an explicit statement of how much work is done on the
system, changing its total mechanical energy), then you can use the information given in the problem to say that, the change
of total mechanical energy is due to these non-conservative forces: ΔKE + ΔPE = Wnc . Make sure Wnc does not
include work done by conservative forces, since those are already accounted for in the potential energy.
Step 5. You have already identified the types of work and energy involved (in step 2). Before solving for the unknown,
eliminate terms wherever possible to simplify the algebra. For example, choose h = 0 at either the initial or final point, so
that PEg is zero there. Then solve for the unknown in the customary manner.
Step 6. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Once you have solved a problem, reexamine the forms of work and
energy to see if you have set up the conservation of energy equation correctly. For example, work done against friction
should be negative, potential energy at the bottom of a hill should be less than that at the top, and so on. Also check to see
Chapter 4 | Work and Energy 115