Figure 5.4 The horizontal component of a projectile’s momentum is conserved if air resistance is negligible, even in this case where a space probe
separates. The forces causing the separation are internal to the system, so that the net external horizontal force Fx – net is still zero. The vertical
component of the momentum is not conserved, because the net vertical force Fy – net is not zero. In the vertical direction, the space probe-Earth
system needs to be considered and we find that the total momentum is conserved. The center of mass of the space probe takes the same path it would
if the separation did not occur.
The conservation of momentum principle can be applied to systems as different as a comet striking Earth and a gas containing
huge numbers of atoms and molecules. Conservation of momentum is violated only when the net external force is not zero. But
another larger system can always be considered in which momentum is conserved by simply including the source of the external
force. For example, in the collision of two cars considered above, the two-car system conserves momentum while each one-car
system does not.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Drop of Tennis Ball and a Basketball
Hold a tennis ball side by side and in contact with a basketball. Drop the balls together. (Be careful!) What happens? Explain
your observations. Now hold the tennis ball above and in contact with the basketball. What happened? Explain your
observations. What do you think will happen if the basketball ball is held above and in contact with the tennis ball?
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Two Tennis Balls in a Ballistic Trajectory
Tie two tennis balls together with a string about a foot long. Hold one ball and let the other hang down and throw it in a
ballistic trajectory. Explain your observations. Now mark the center of the string with bright ink or attach a brightly colored
sticker to it and throw again. What happened? Explain your observations.
Some aquatic animals such as jellyfish move around based on the principles of conservation of momentum. A jellyfish fills its
umbrella section with water and then pushes the water out resulting in motion in the opposite direction to that of the jet of
water. Squids propel themselves in a similar manner but, in contrast with jellyfish, are able to control the direction in which
they move by aiming their nozzle forward or backward. Typical squids can move at speeds of 8 to 12 km/h.
The ballistocardiograph (BCG) was a diagnostic tool used in the second half of the 20th century to study the strength of the
heart. About once a second, your heart beats, forcing blood into the aorta. A force in the opposite direction is exerted on the
rest of your body (recall Newton’s third law). A ballistocardiograph is a device that can measure this reaction force. This
measurement is done by using a sensor (resting on the person) or by using a moving table suspended from the ceiling. This
technique can gather information on the strength of the heart beat and the volume of blood passing from the heart. However,
the electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) and the echocardiogram (cardiac ECHO or ECHO; a technique that uses ultrasound to
see an image of the heart) are more widely used in the practice of cardiology.
Making Connections: Conservation of Momentum and Collision
Conservation of momentum is quite useful in describing collisions. Momentum is crucial to our understanding of atomic and
subatomic particles because much of what we know about these particles comes from collision experiments.
5.4 Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
Let us consider various types of two-object collisions. These collisions are the easiest to analyze, and they illustrate many of the
physical principles involved in collisions. The conservation of momentum principle is very useful here, and it can be used
Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum 133