(5.13)Δp = m(vf – vi)
= ⎛
⎝0.057 kg⎞
⎠(58 m/s – 0 m/s)
= 3.306 kg · m/s ≈ 3.3 kg · m/s
Now the magnitude of the net external force can determined by using Fnet = Δp
Δt :
(5.14)
Fnet = Δp
Δt = 3.306 kg ⋅ m/s
5.0×10−3 s
= 661 N ≈ 660 N,
where we have retained only two significant figures in the final step.
Discussion
This quantity was the average force exerted by Venus Williams’ racquet on the tennis ball during its brief impact (note that
the ball also experienced the 0.56-N force of gravity, but that force was not due to the racquet). This problem could also be
solved by first finding the acceleration and then using Fnet = ma , but one additional step would be required compared with
the strategy used in this example.
5.2 Impulse
The effect of a force on an object depends on how long it acts, as well as how great the force is. In previous examples, a very
large force acting for a short time had a great effect on the momentum of the tennis ball. A small force could cause the same
change in momentum, but it would have to act for a much longer time. For example, if the ball were thrown upward, the
gravitational force (which is much smaller than the tennis racquet’s force) would eventually reverse the momentum of the ball.
Quantitatively, the effect we are talking about is the change in momentum Δ p .
By rearranging the equation Fnet = Δ p
Δ t to be
(5.15)Δ p = Fnet Δ t,
we can see how the change in momentum equals the average net external force multiplied by the time this force acts. The
quantity Fnet Δ t , force times duration, is given the name impulse. Net impulse on an object gives its change in momentum.
Impulse: Change in Momentum
Change in momentum equals the average net external force multiplied by the time this force acts: Δ p = Fnet Δ t .
The quantity Fnet Δ t is given the name impulse.
There are many ways in which an understanding of impulse can save lives, or at least limbs. The dashboard padding in a
car, and certainly the airbags, allow the net force on the occupants in the car to act over a much longer time when there is a
sudden stop. The momentum change is the same for an occupant, whether an air bag is deployed or not, but the force (to
bring the occupant to a stop) will be much less if it acts over a larger time. Cars today have many plastic components. One
advantage of plastics is their lighter weight, which results in better gas mileage. Another advantage is that a car will crumple
in a collision, especially in the event of a head-on collision. A longer collision time means the force on the car will be less.
Deaths during car races decreased dramatically when the rigid frames of racing cars were replaced with parts that could
crumple or collapse in the event of an accident.
Bones in a body will fracture if the force on them is too large. If you jump onto the floor from a table, the force on your legs
can be immense if you land stiff-legged on a hard surface. Rolling on the ground after jumping from the table, or landing with
a parachute, extends the time over which the force (on you from the ground) acts.
Our definition of impulse includes an assumption that the force is constant over the time interval Δt . Forces are usually not
constant. Forces vary considerably even during the brief time intervals considered. It is, however, possible to find an average
effective force Feff that produces the same result as the corresponding time-varying force. Figure 5.2 shows a graph of what
an actual force looks like as a function of time for a ball bouncing off the floor. The area under the curve has units of momentum
and is equal to the impulse or change in momentum between times t1 and t2 . That area is equal to the area inside the
rectangle bounded by Feff , t1 , and t2 . Thus the impulses and their effects are the same for both the actual and effective
forces.
130 Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12