where i and f denote initial and final values. This equation is a form of the work-energy theorem for conservative forces; it is
known as the conservation of mechanical energy principle. Remember that this applies to the extent that all the forces are
conservative, so that friction is negligible. The total kinetic plus potential energy of a system is defined to be its mechanical
energy, (KE + PE) . In a system that experiences only conservative forces, there is a potential energy associated with each
force, and the energy only changes form between KE and the various types of PE , with the total energy remaining constant.
Example 4.9 Using Conservation of Mechanical Energy to Calculate the Speed of a Toy Car
A 0.100-kg toy car is propelled by a compressed spring, as shown in Figure 4.9. The car follows a track that rises 0.180 m
above the starting point. The compressed spring has a potential energy of 0.200 J. Assuming work done by friction to be
negligible, find (a) how fast the car is going before it starts up the slope and (b) how fast it is going at the top of the slope.
Figure 4.9 A toy car is pushed by a compressed spring and coasts up a slope. Assuming negligible friction, the potential energy in the spring is
first completely converted to kinetic energy, and then to a combination of kinetic and gravitational potential energy as the car rises. The details of
the path are unimportant because all forces are conservative—the car would have the same final speed if it took the alternate path shown.
Strategy
The spring force and the gravitational force are conservative forces, so conservation of mechanical energy can be used.
Thus,
(4.52)KEi +PEi = KEf + PEf
or
(4.53)1
2mvi
2 + mghi + PEsi = 1
2mvf
2 + mghf + PEsf
where h is the height (vertical position) and PEs is the potential energy of the spring. This general statement looks
complex but becomes much simpler when we start considering specific situations. First, we must identify the initial and final
conditions in a problem; then, we enter them into the last equation to solve for an unknown.
Solution for (a)
This part of the problem is limited to conditions just before the car is released and just after it leaves the spring. Take the
initial height to be zero, so that both hi and hf are zero. Furthermore, the initial speed vi is zero and the final
compression of the spring is zero, and so several terms in the conservation of mechanical energy equation are zero and it
simplifies to
(4.54)PEsi = 1
2mvf
2.
In other words, the initial potential energy in the spring is converted completely to kinetic energy in the absence of friction.
Solving for the final speed and entering known values yields
(4.55)
vf = 2 PEsi
m = (2)(0.200 J)
0.100 kg = 2.00 m / s.
Solution for (b)
One method of finding the speed at the top of the slope is to consider conditions just before the car is released and just after
it reaches the top of the slope, completely ignoring everything in between. Doing the same type of analysis to find which
terms are zero, the conservation of mechanical energy becomes
(4.56)PEsi = 1
2mvf
2 + mghf.
This form of the equation means that the spring’s initial potential energy is converted partly to gravitational potential energy
and partly to kinetic energy. The final speed at the top of the slope will be less than at the bottom. Solving for vf and
substituting known values gives
114 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12