system.
• Elastic potential energy PEel stored in the deformation of a system that can be described by Hooke’s law is given by
PEel = (1 / 2)kx2.
4.6 Power
• Power is the rate at which work is done, or in equation form, for the average power P for work W done over a time t ,
P = W / t .
• The SI unit for power is the watt (W), where 1 W = 1 J/s .
• The power of many devices such as electric motors is also often expressed in horsepower (hp), where 1 hp = 746 W .
Conceptual Questions
4.1 Work: The Scientific Definition
1. Give an example of something we think of as work in everyday circumstances that is not work in the scientific sense. Is energy
transferred or changed in form in your example? If so, explain how this is accomplished without doing work.
2. Give an example of a situation in which there is a force and a displacement, but the force does no work. Explain why it does
no work.
3. Describe a situation in which a force is exerted for a long time but does no work. Explain.
4.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem
4. The person in Figure 4.16 does work on the lawn mower. Under what conditions would the mower gain energy? Under what
conditions would it lose energy?
Figure 4.16
5. Work done on a system puts energy into it. Work done by a system removes energy from it. Give an example for each
statement.
6. When solving for speed in Example 4.5, we kept only the positive root. Why?
4.3 Gravitational Potential Energy
7. In Example 4.8, we calculated the final speed of a roller coaster that descended 20 m in height and had an initial speed of 5
m/s downhill. Suppose the roller coaster had had an initial speed of 5 m/s uphill instead, and it coasted uphill, stopped, and then
rolled back down to a final point 20 m below the start. We would find in that case that it had the same final speed. Explain in
terms of conservation of energy.
8. Does the work you do on a book when you lift it onto a shelf depend on the path taken? On the time taken? On the height of
the shelf? On the mass of the book?
4.4 Conservative Forces, Potential Energy, and Conservation of Energy
9. What is a conservative force?
10. The force exerted by a diving board is conservative, provided the internal friction is negligible. Assuming friction is negligible,
describe changes in the potential energy of a diving board as a swimmer dives from it, starting just before the swimmer steps on
the board until just after his feet leave it.
11. Define mechanical energy. What is the relationship of mechanical energy to nonconservative forces? What happens to
mechanical energy if only conservative forces act?
12. What is the relationship of potential energy to conservative force?
124 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12