chemical energy:
conservation of mechanical energy:
conservative force:
deformation:
elastic potential energy:
electrical energy:
energy:
gravitational potential energy:
horsepower:
joule:
kilowatt-hour:
kinetic energy:
law of conservation of energy:
mechanical energy:
net work:
nuclear energy:
potential energy:
power:
(4.67)cost = (36.0 kW ⋅ h)($0.120 per kW ⋅ h) = $4.32 per month.
Discussion
The cost of using the computer in this example is neither exorbitant nor negligible. It is clear that the cost is a combination of
power and time. When both are high, such as for an air conditioner in the summer, the cost is high.
The motivation to save energy has become more compelling with its ever-increasing price. Armed with the knowledge that
energy consumed is the product of power and time, you can estimate costs for yourself and make the necessary value
judgments about where to save energy. Either power or time must be reduced. It is most cost-effective to limit the use of high-
power devices that normally operate for long periods of time, such as water heaters and air conditioners. This would not include
relatively high power devices like toasters, because they are on only a few minutes per day. It would also not include electric
clocks, in spite of their 24-hour-per-day usage, because they are very low power devices. It is sometimes possible to use devices
that have greater efficiencies—that is, devices that consume less power to accomplish the same task. One example is the
compact fluorescent light bulb, which produces over four times more light per watt of power consumed than its incandescent
cousin.
Modern civilization depends on energy, but current levels of energy consumption and production are not sustainable. The
likelihood of a link between global warming and fossil fuel use (with its concomitant production of carbon dioxide), has made
reduction in energy use as well as a shift to non-fossil fuels of the utmost importance. Even though energy in an isolated system
is a conserved quantity, the final result of most energy transformations is waste heat transfer to the environment, which is no
longer useful for doing work. As we will discuss in more detail later, the potential for energy to produce useful work has been
“degraded” in the energy transformation.
Glossary
the energy in a substance stored in the bonds between atoms and molecules that can be released in a
chemical reaction
the rule that the sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies remains constant if
only conservative forces act on and within a system
a force that is a function of position alone, with the result that the work done by the force depends only
on the starting and ending points of a motion and not on the particular path taken
displacement from equilibrium
potential energy stored as a result of deformation of an elastic object, such as the stretching of a
spring
the energy carried by a flow of charge
the ability to do work
energy associated with height of objects on the Earth
an older non-SI unit of power, with 1 hp = 746 W
SI unit of work and energy, equal to one newton-meter
(kW ⋅ h) unit used primarily for electrical energy provided by electric utility companies
the energy an object has by reason of its motion, equal to 1
2mv2 for the translational (i.e., non-rotational)
motion of an object of mass m moving at speed v
the general law that total energy is constant in any process; energy may change in form or
be transferred from one system to another, but the total remains the same
the sum of kinetic energy and potential energy
work done by the net force, or vector sum of all the forces, acting on an object
energy released by changes within atomic nuclei, such as the fusion of two light nuclei or the fission of a
heavy nucleus
energy due to position, shape, or configuration
the rate at which work is done
122 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12