with a minus sign because the displacement while stopping and the force from floor are in opposite directions. The floor
removes energy from the system, so it does negative work.
The kinetic energy the person has upon reaching the floor is the amount of potential energy lost by falling through height
Δh :
(4.34)KE = −ΔPEg = −mgΔh,
The distance d that the person’s knees bend is much smaller than the height Δh of the fall, so the additional change in
gravitational potential energy during the knee bend is ignored.
The work W done by the floor on the person stops the person and brings the person’s kinetic energy to zero:
(4.35)W = −KE = mgΔh.
Combining this equation with the expression for W gives
(4.36)−Fd = mgΔh.
Recalling that Δh is negative because the person fell down, the force on the knee joints is given by
(4.37)
F = − mgΔh
d = −
⎛
⎝60.0 kg⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝9.80 m/s2⎞
⎠(−3.00 m)
5.00×10−3 m
= 3.53×105 N.
Discussion
Such a large force (500 times more than the person’s weight) over the short impact time is enough to break bones. A much
better way to cushion the shock is by bending the legs or rolling on the ground, increasing the time over which the force
acts. A bending motion of 0.5 m this way yields a force 100 times smaller than in the example. A kangaroo's hopping shows
this method in action. The kangaroo is the only large animal to use hopping for locomotion, but the shock in hopping is
cushioned by the bending of its hind legs in each jump.(See Figure 4.7.)
Figure 4.7 The work done by the ground upon the kangaroo reduces its kinetic energy to zero as it lands. However, by applying the force of the ground
on the hind legs over a longer distance, the impact on the bones is reduced. (credit: Chris Samuel, Flickr)
Example 4.8 Finding the Speed of a Roller Coaster from its Height
(a) What is the final speed of the roller coaster shown in Figure 4.8 if it starts from rest at the top of the 20.0 m hill and work
done by frictional forces is negligible? (b) What is its final speed (again assuming negligible friction) if its initial speed is 5.00
m/s?
Chapter 4 | Work and Energy 111