Solving for the final speed as requested and entering known values gives
(4.24)
v = 2(95.75 J)
m = 191.5 kg ⋅ m2/s2
30.0 kg
= 2.53 m/s.
Discussion
Using work and energy, we not only arrive at an answer, we see that the final kinetic energy is the sum of the initial kinetic
energy and the net work done on the package. This means that the work indeed adds to the energy of the package.
Example 4.6 Work and Energy Can Reveal Distance, Too
How far does the package in Figure 4.4 coast after the push, assuming friction remains constant? Use work and energy
considerations.
Strategy
We know that once the person stops pushing, friction will bring the package to rest. In terms of energy, friction does negative
work until it has removed all of the package’s kinetic energy. The work done by friction can be expressed as the force of
friction times the distance traveled and as the change in kinetic energy. Equating both expressions for work gives us a way
of finding the distance traveled.
Solution
The normal force and force of gravity cancel in calculating the net force. The horizontal friction force is then the net force,
and it acts opposite to the displacement. To reduce the kinetic energy of the package to zero, the work Wfr by friction must
be equal to the change in kinetic energy.
(4.25)Wfr = − Ffr d = ΔKE
(4.26)−Ffr d = ΔKE
and so
(4.27)−Ffr d = 1
2mv2 − 1
2mv0
2
Initial speed is the speed at the instant the push stops (the result determined in the previous example). The final speed is
zero for this case and leads to the expression below.
(4.28)Ffr d = 1
2mv0
2
Solving for distance, we obtain the result shown below.
(4.29)d = 95.75 J
5.00 N = 19.2 m
Discussion
This is a reasonable distance for a package to coast on a relatively friction-free conveyor system. Note that the work done
by friction is negative (the force is in the opposite direction of motion), so it removes the kinetic energy.
Some of the examples in this section can be solved without considering energy, but at the expense of missing out on gaining
insights about what work and energy are doing in this situation. On the whole, solutions involving energy are generally shorter
and easier than those using kinematics and dynamics alone.
4.3 Gravitational Potential Energy
Work Done Against Gravity
Consider lifting a weight (of, say, 5 kg, which weighs about 50 N) from the floor to a table surface at a height of 1 meter from the
floor. In lifting this weight, you have done work, both in the usual sense (if you do this lifting of weight over and over, you will
eventually get tired) and in the scientific sense we defined in the earlier section ( W = Fd , and you applied an upward force as
you displaced the weight upward by 1 meter). One thing is different in this scenario, however. Earlier, in describing work-kinetic
energy theorem, we said that net work done on an object changes the kinetic energy of the object ( ΔKE = Wnet ). But in this
case, if you imagine lifting the weight very slowly up to the height of the table, you will find that the kinetic energy of the weight
does not change. It starts at zero and remains at zero throughout this very slow motion. What is going on here?
The key difference is that, for this weight, there are now two forces acting on it as it is being lifted. The gravitational force pulls
downward, while the force you apply is directed upward. If you are lifting the weight very slowly, then its acceleration is very close
108 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12