oxygen into work output. (A horse can put out 1 hp for hours on end.) Once oxygen is depleted, power output decreases and the
person begins to breathe rapidly to obtain oxygen to metabolize more food—this is known as the aerobic stage of exercise. If the
woman climbed the stairs slowly, then her power output would be much less, although the amount of work done would be the
same.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Measure Your Power Rating
Determine your own power rating by measuring the time it takes you to climb a flight of stairs. We will ignore the gain in
kinetic energy, as the above example showed that it was a small portion of the energy gain. Don’t expect that your output will
be more than about 0.5 hp.
Examples of Power
Examples of power are limited only by the imagination, because there are as many types as there are forms of work and energy.
(See Table 4.1 for some examples.) Sunlight reaching Earth’s surface carries a maximum power of about 1.3 kilowatts per
square meter (kW/m2). A tiny fraction of this is retained by Earth over the long term. Our consumption rate of fossil fuels is far
greater than the rate at which they are stored, so it is inevitable that they will be depleted. Power implies that energy is
transferred, perhaps changing form. It is never possible to change one form completely into another without losing some of it as
thermal energy. For example, a 60-W incandescent bulb converts only 5 W of electrical power to light, with 55 W dissipating into
thermal energy. Furthermore, the typical electric power plant converts only 35 to 40% of its fuel into electricity. The remainder
becomes a huge amount of thermal energy that must be dispersed as heat transfer, as rapidly as it is created. A coal-fired power
plant may produce 1000 megawatts; 1 megawatt (MW) is 106 W of electric power. But the power plant consumes chemical
energy at a rate of about 2500 MW, creating heat transfer to the surroundings at a rate of 1500 MW. (See Figure 4.15.)
Figure 4.15 Tremendous amounts of electric power are generated by coal-fired power plants such as this one in China, but an even larger amount of
power goes into heat transfer to the surroundings. The large cooling towers here are needed to transfer heat as rapidly as it is produced. The transfer
of heat is not unique to coal plants but is an unavoidable consequence of generating electric power from any fuel—nuclear, coal, oil, natural gas, or the
like. (credit: Kleinolive, Wikimedia Commons)
120 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12