factors to economic growth. The world use of energy resources, especially oil, continues to grow, with ominous consequences
economically, socially, politically, and environmentally. We will briefly examine the world’s energy use patterns at the end of this
chapter.
There is no simple, yet accurate, scientific definition for energy. Energy is characterized by its many forms and the fact that it is
conserved. We can loosely define energy as the ability to do work, admitting that in some circumstances not all energy is
available to do work. Because of the association of energy with work, we begin the chapter with a discussion of work. Work is
intimately related to energy and how energy moves from one system to another or changes form.
4.1 Work: The Scientific Definition
What It Means to Do Work
The scientific definition of work differs in some ways from its everyday meaning. Certain things we think of as hard work, such as
writing an exam or carrying a heavy load on level ground, are not work as defined by a scientist. The scientific definition of work
reveals its relationship to energy—whenever work is done, energy is transferred.
For work, in the scientific sense, to be done, a force must be exerted and there must be motion or displacement in the direction
of the force.
Formally, the work done on a system by a constant force is defined to be the product of the component of the force in the
direction of motion times the distance through which the force acts. For one-way motion in one dimension, this is expressed in
equation form as
(4.1)W = F|| d
Where W is work, d is the distance the force acts, and F|| is the force parallel to the direction of motion. We can also write
this more simply as
(4.2)W = Fd
as long as one keeps in mind that the force is in the same direction as the distance.
To find the work done on a system that undergoes motion that is not one-way or that is in two or three dimensions, we would
divide the motion into one-way one-dimensional segments and add up the work done over each segment.
What is Work?
The work done on a system by a constant force is the product of the component of the force in the direction of motion times
the distance through which the force acts. For one-way motion in one dimension, this is expressed in equation form as
(4.3)W = Fd
Where W is work, d is the distance the force acts, F is the force parallel to the direction of motion.
102 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12