that the numerical value obtained is reasonable. For example, the final speed of a skateboarder who coasts down a 3-m-
high ramp could reasonably be 20 km/h, but not 80 km/h.
Transformation of Energy
The transformation of energy from one form into others is happening all the time. The chemical energy in food is converted into
thermal energy through metabolism; light energy is converted into chemical energy through photosynthesis. In a larger example,
the chemical energy contained in coal is converted into thermal energy as it burns to turn water into steam in a boiler. This
thermal energy in the steam in turn is converted to mechanical energy as it spins a turbine, which is connected to a generator to
produce electrical energy. (In all of these examples, not all of the initial energy is converted into the forms mentioned. This
important point is discussed later in this section.)
Another example of energy conversion occurs in a solar cell. Sunlight impinging on a solar cell (see Figure 4.10) produces
electricity, which in turn can be used to run an electric motor. Energy is converted from the primary source of solar energy into
electrical energy and then into mechanical energy.
Figure 4.10 Solar energy is converted into electrical energy by solar cells, which is used to run a motor in this solar-power aircraft. (credit: NASA)
4.5 Spring Potential Energy
Hooke's Law, F = -kx , describes force exerted by a spring being deformed. Here, F is the restoring force, x is the
displacement from equilibrium or deformation, and k is a constant related to the difficulty in deforming the system. The minus
sign indicates the restoring force is in the direction opposite to the displacement.
In order to produce a deformation, work must be done. That is, a force must be exerted through a distance, whether you pluck a
guitar string or compress a car spring. If the only result is deformation, and no work goes into thermal, sound, or kinetic energy,
then all the work is initially stored in the deformed object as some form of potential energy. The potential energy stored in a
spring is PEel = 1
2kx 2 . Here, we generalize the idea to elastic potential energy for a deformation of any system that can be
described by Hooke’s law. Hence,
(4.58)PEel = 1
2kx 2,
where PEel is the elastic potential energy stored in any deformed system that obeys Hooke’s law and has a displacement x
from equilibrium and a force constant k .
It is possible to find the work done in deforming a system in order to find the energy stored. This work is performed by an applied
force Fapp . The applied force is exactly opposite to the restoring force (action-reaction), and so Fapp = kx . Figure 4.11 shows
a graph of the applied force versus deformation x for a system that can be described by Hooke’s law. Work done on the system
is force multiplied by distance, which equals the area under the curve or (1 / 2)kx 2 (Method A in the figure). Another way to
determine the work is to note that the force increases linearly from 0 to kx , so that the average force is (1 / 2)kx , the distance
moved is x , and thus W = Fappd = [(1 / 2)kx](x) = (1 / 2)kx 2 (Method B in the figure).
116 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12