This means that the final kinetic energy is the sum of the initial kinetic energy and the gravitational potential energy. Mass
again cancels, and
(4.47)vf = −2ghf + vi
2
Now, substituting known values gives
(4.48)vf = −2ghf + vi
2 = ( − 2)(9.80 m / s2)( − 20.0 m) + (5.00 m / s)2 = 20.4 m / s.
Discussion and Implications
First, note that mass cancels. This is quite consistent with observations that all objects fall at the same rate if friction is
negligible. Second, only the speed of the roller coaster is considered; there is no information about its direction at any point.
This reveals another general truth. When friction is negligible, the speed of a falling body depends only on its initial speed
and height, and not on its mass or the path taken. For example, the roller coaster will have the same final speed whether it
falls 20.0 m straight down or takes a more complicated path like the one in the figure. Third, and perhaps unexpectedly, the
final speed in part (b) is greater than in part (a), but by far less than 5.00 m/s. Finally, note that speed can be found at any
height along the way by simply using the appropriate value of h at the point of interest.
We have seen that work done by or against the gravitational force depends only on the starting and ending points, and not on the
path between, allowing us to define the simplifying concept of gravitational potential energy. We can do the same thing for a few
other forces, and we will see that this leads to a formal definition of the law of conservation of energy.
4.4 Conservative Forces, Potential Energy, and Conservation of Energy
Potential Energy and Conservative Forces
Work is done by a force, and some forces, such as weight, have special characteristics. A conservative force is one, like the
gravitational force, for which work done by or against it depends only on the starting and ending points of a motion and not on the
path taken. This happens if the force is a function of position alone and not time, velocity, or other parameters. We can define a
potential energy (PE) for any conservative force, just as we did for the gravitational force. For example, when you wind up a
toy, an egg timer, or an old-fashioned watch, you do work against its spring and store energy in it. (We treat these springs as
ideal, in that we assume there is no friction and no production of thermal energy.) This stored energy is recoverable as work, and
it is useful to think of it as potential energy contained in the spring. Indeed, the reason that the spring has this characteristic is
that its force is conservative. That is, a conservative force results in stored or potential energy. Gravitational potential energy is
one example, as is the energy stored in a spring. We will also see how conservative forces are related to the conservation of
energy.
Potential Energy and Conservative Forces
Potential energy is the energy a system has due to position, shape, or configuration. It is stored energy that is completely
recoverable.
A conservative force is a force that is a function of position alone, with the result that the work done by the force depends
only on the starting and ending points of a motion and not on the particular path taken.
Change in potential energy comes from the work done against a conservative force. Or flipping this around, potential energy
increases as a conservative force does a negative work. That is,
(4.49)ΔPE = −Wc,
where Wc is work done by a conservative force.
Conservation of Mechanical Energy
Consider an object in a system. If it gains any kinetic energy, this is a result of a net work done on the object, according to the
work-kinetic energy theorem. If only conservative forces, such as the gravitational force or a spring force, do work in this system,
then as kinetic energy increases with the net work done by the conservative forces, the system loses potential energy. That is,
ΔKE = Wc = -ΔPE . In other words,
(4.50)ΔKE + ΔPE = 0.
This equation means that the total kinetic and potential energy is constant for any process involving only conservative forces.
That is,
(4.51)KE + PE = constant    
or
KEi + PEi = KEf + PEf
⎫
⎭
⎬(conservative forces only),
Chapter 4 | Work and Energy 113