(4.31)ΔPEg = PEgf − PEgi = mghf − mghi = mg( hf − hi) = mgΔh
Note that Δh is positive when the final height is greater than the initial height, and vice versa. For example, if a 0.500-kg mass
hung from a cuckoo clock is raised 1.00 m, then its change in gravitational potential energy is
(4.32)mgΔh = ⎛
⎝0.500 kg⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝9.80 m/s2⎞
⎠(1.00 m)
= 4.90 kg ⋅ m2/s2 = 4.90 J.
Note that the units of gravitational potential energy turn out to be joules, the same as for work and other forms of energy. As the
clock runs, the mass is lowered. We can think of the mass as gradually giving up its 4.90 J of gravitational potential energy,
without directly considering the force of gravity that does the work.
Using Potential Energy to Simplify Calculations
The equation ΔPEg = mgΔh applies for any path that has a change in height of Δh , not just when the mass is lifted straight
up. (See Figure 4.6.) It is much easier to calculate mgΔh (a simple multiplication) than it is to calculate the work done along a
complicated path. The idea of gravitational potential energy has the double advantage that it is very broadly applicable and it
makes calculations easier. From now on, we will consider that any change in vertical position Δh of a mass m is accompanied
by a change in gravitational potential energy mgΔh , and we will avoid the equivalent but more difficult task of calculating work
done by or against the gravitational force.
Figure 4.6 The change in gravitational potential energy (ΔPEg) between points A and B is independent of the path. ΔPEg = mgΔh for any
path between the two points. Gravity is one of a small class of forces where the work done by or against the force depends only on the starting and
ending points, not on the path between them.
Example 4.7 The Force to Stop Falling
A 60.0-kg person jumps onto the floor from a height of 3.00 m. If he lands stiffly (with his knee joints compressing by 0.500
cm), calculate the force on the knee joints.
Strategy
This person’s energy is brought to zero in this situation by the work done on him by the floor as he stops. The initial PEg is
transformed into KE as he falls. The work done by the floor reduces this kinetic energy to zero.
Solution
The work done on the person by the floor as he stops is given by
(4.33)W = - Fd,
110 Chapter 4 | Work and Energy
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12