Figure 7.2 This figure skater increases her rate of spin by pulling her arms and her extended leg closer to her axis of rotation. (credit: Luu, Wikimedia
Commons)
(This media type is not supported in this reader. Click to open media in browser.) (http://legacy.cnx.org/content/m42176/
1.8/#concept-trailer-angular-momentum)
7.1 Angular Acceleration
Previously, we looked at uniform circular motion, where an object moves in a circular path at a constant speed (but changing
directions, so it undergoes centripetal acceleration). We can also describe this in terms of a rotation at a constant rate. For
example, an object completing a circle every second can be said to rotate at a constant rate of 360 degrees per second about
the center of the circle, since there are 360 degrees in one complete circle.
For the formulas and equations you will see in this chapter, we will introduce a mathematically convenient unit of angle called
radians. An angular measure in radian is defined by the arc length covered by the angle divided by the radius of the circle that
the arc length is part of. Do you see how, if the angular size remains the same, as we consider larger circles, with matching
longer arc length, the ratio of arc length to the radius of the circle remains constant? Consider this example. The circumference
S of a circle of radius r is given by S = 2πr . So the angular size of a full circle is this circumference (a special kind of arc
length) divided by the radius, or 2π (so you could say 2π radians is equal to 360 degrees).
So, imagine an object completing a uniform circular motion of radius r at speed v , and let's say it takes time Δ t to complete
one full circle. Then using what we learned in kinematics, we know this holds:
(7.1)v = Δ s
Δ t = 2πr
Δ t,
where Δ s is the arc length, or the circumference, in this case. We can also describe this in terms of angular velocity, or the
rate of change of angle,
(7.2)ω = Δ θ
Δ t = 2π
Δ t,
where change of angle Δ θ in this case is the full circle, or 2π radians. We use ω (lower-case omega) to denote angular
velocity.
Carefully comparing Equation 7.1 with Equation 7.2, we see that following relationships hold:
(7.3)v = rω
and
(7.4)ω = v
r .
We are going to use this relationship to relate linear motion with rotation (or angular motion) whenever necessary. A summary
with figure is in Figure 7.3. In Figure 7.3, also note that, given the same angular velocity ω , an object at a larger radius has a
larger linear speed (does this make intuitive sense?).
172 Chapter 7 | Rotation
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12