Figure 7.12 The first image shows how helicopters store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy in their blades. This energy must be put into the
blades before takeoff and maintained until the end of the flight. The engines do not have enough power to simultaneously provide lift and put significant
rotational energy into the blades. The second image shows a helicopter from the Auckland Westpac Rescue Helicopter Service. Over 50,000 lives
have been saved since its operations beginning in 1973. Here, a water rescue operation is shown. (credit: 111 Emergency, Flickr)
How Thick Is the Soup? Or Why Don’t All Objects Roll Downhill at the Same Rate?
One of the quality controls in a tomato soup factory consists of rolling filled cans down a ramp. If they roll too fast, the soup is too
thin. Why should cans of identical size and mass roll down an incline at different rates? And why should the thickest soup roll the
slowest?
The easiest way to answer these questions is to consider energy. Suppose each can starts down the ramp from rest. Each can
starting from rest means each starts with the same gravitational potential energy PEgrav , which is converted entirely to KE ,
provided each rolls without slipping. KE , however, can take the form of KEtrans or KErot , and total KE is the sum of the
two. If a can rolls down a ramp, it puts part of its energy into rotation, leaving less for translation. Thus, the can goes slower than
it would if it slid down. Furthermore, the thin soup does not rotate, whereas the thick soup does, because it sticks to the can. The
thick soup thus puts more of the can’s original gravitational potential energy into rotation than the thin soup, and the can rolls
more slowly, as seen in Figure 7.13.
Figure 7.13 Three cans of soup with identical masses race down an incline. The first can has a low friction coating and does not roll but just slides
down the incline. It wins because it converts its entire PE into translational KE. The second and third cans both roll down the incline without slipping.
The second can contains thin soup and comes in second because part of its initial PE goes into rotating the can (but not the thin soup). The third can
contains thick soup. It comes in third because the soup rotates along with the can, taking even more of the initial PE for rotational KE, leaving less for
translational KE.
Assuming no losses due to friction, there is only one force doing work—gravity. Therefore the total work done is the change in
kinetic energy. As the cans start moving, the potential energy is changing into kinetic energy. Conservation of energy gives
(7.30)PEi = KEf.
More specifically,
(7.31)PEgrav = KEtrans + KErot
or
(7.32)mgh = 1
2mv2 + 1
2Iω2.
Chapter 7 | Rotation 181