7.3 Rotational Kinetic Energy
• The rotational kinetic energy KErot for an object with a moment of inertia I and an angular velocity ω is given by
KErot = 1
2Iω2.
• Helicopters store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy in their blades. This energy must be put into the blades before
takeoff and maintained until the end of the flight. The engines do not have enough power to simultaneously provide lift and
put significant rotational energy into the blades.
• Work and energy in rotational motion are completely analogous to work and energy in translational motion.
7.4 Angular Momentum and Its Conservation
• Every rotational phenomenon has a direct translational analog , likewise angular momentum L can be defined as
L = Iω.
• This equation is an analog to the definition of linear momentum as p = mv . The relationship between torque and angular
momentum is net τ = ΔL
Δt .
• Angular momentum, like energy and linear momentum, is conserved. This universally applicable law is another sign of
underlying unity in physical laws. Angular momentum is conserved when net external torque is zero, just as linear
momentum is conserved when the net external force is zero.
7.5 Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum
• Torque is perpendicular to the plane formed by r and F and is the direction your right thumb would point if you curled the
fingers of your right hand in the direction of F . The direction of the torque is thus the same as that of the change in angular
momentum it produces.
• The gyroscope precesses around a vertical axis, since the torque is always horizontal and perpendicular to L . If the
gyroscope is not spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the direction of the torque ( L = ΔL ), and it rotates about a
horizontal axis, falling over just as we would expect.
• Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope. Its angular momentum is along its axis and points at Polaris, the North Star.
Conceptual Questions
7.1 Angular Acceleration
1. Analogies exist between rotational and translational physical quantities. Identify the rotational term analogous to each of the
following: acceleration, force, mass, work, translational kinetic energy, linear momentum, impulse.
2. Explain why centripetal acceleration changes the direction of velocity in circular motion but not its magnitude.
3. In circular motion, a tangential acceleration can change the magnitude of the velocity but not its direction. Explain your
answer.
4. Suppose a piece of food is on the edge of a rotating microwave oven plate. Does it experience nonzero tangential
acceleration, centripetal acceleration, or both when: (a) The plate starts to spin? (b) The plate rotates at constant angular
velocity? (c) The plate slows to a halt?
7.2 Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia
5. The moment of inertia of a long rod spun around an axis through one end perpendicular to its length is ML2 /3 . Why is this
moment of inertia greater than it would be if you spun a point mass M at the location of the center of mass of the rod (at L / 2
)? (That would be ML2 /4 .)
6. Why is the moment of inertia of a hoop that has a mass M and a radius R greater than the moment of inertia of a disk that
has the same mass and radius? Why is the moment of inertia of a spherical shell that has a mass M and a radius R greater
than that of a solid sphere that has the same mass and radius?
7. Give an example in which a small force exerts a large torque. Give another example in which a large force exerts a small
torque.
Chapter 7 | Rotation 191