14. Suppose a child walks from the outer edge of a rotating merry-go round to the inside. Does the angular velocity of the merry-
go-round increase, decrease, or remain the same? Explain your answer.
Figure 7.23 A child may jump off a merry-go-round in a variety of directions.
15. Suppose a child gets off a rotating merry-go-round. Does the angular velocity of the merry-go-round increase, decrease, or
remain the same if: (a) He jumps off radially? (b) He jumps backward to land motionless? (c) He jumps straight up and hangs
onto an overhead tree branch? (d) He jumps off forward, tangential to the edge? Explain your answers. (Refer to Figure 7.23).
16. Helicopters have a small propeller on their tail to keep them from rotating in the opposite direction of their main lifting blades.
Explain in terms of Newton’s third law why the helicopter body rotates in the opposite direction to the blades.
17. Whenever a helicopter has two sets of lifting blades, they rotate in opposite directions (and there will be no tail propeller).
Explain why it is best to have the blades rotate in opposite directions.
18. Describe how work is done by a skater pulling in her arms during a spin. In particular, identify the force she exerts on each
arm to pull it in and the distance each moves, noting that a component of the force is in the direction moved. Why is angular
momentum not increased by this action?
19. When there is a global heating trend on Earth, the atmosphere expands and the length of the day increases very slightly.
Explain why the length of a day increases.
20. Nearly all conventional piston engines have flywheels on them to smooth out engine vibrations caused by the thrust of
individual piston firings. Why does the flywheel have this effect?
21. Jet turbines spin rapidly. They are designed to fly apart if something makes them seize suddenly, rather than transfer angular
momentum to the plane’s wing, possibly tearing it off. Explain how flying apart conserves angular momentum without transferring
it to the wing.
22. An astronaut tightens a bolt on a satellite in orbit. He rotates in a direction opposite to that of the bolt, and the satellite rotates
in the same direction as the bolt. Explain why. If a handhold is available on the satellite, can this counter-rotation be prevented?
Explain your answer.
23. Competitive divers pull their limbs in and curl up their bodies when they do flips. Just before entering the water, they fully
extend their limbs to enter straight down. Explain the effect of both actions on their angular velocities. Also explain the effect on
their angular momenta.
Figure 7.24 The diver spins rapidly when curled up and slows when she extends her limbs before entering the water.
24. Draw a free body diagram to show how a diver gains angular momentum when leaving the diving board.
Chapter 7 | Rotation 193