new laws emerge from their study? The physical characteristics of fluids and some of the laws that govern their behavior are the
topics of this chapter.
Also by their very definition, fluids flow. Examples come easily—a column of smoke rises from a camp fire, water streams from a
fire hose, blood courses through your veins. Why does rising smoke curl and twist? How does a nozzle increase the speed of
water emerging from a hose? How does the body regulate blood flow? The physics of fluids in motion—fluid dynamics—allows
us to answer these and many other questions.
8.1 What Is a Fluid?
Matter most commonly exists as a solid, liquid, or gas; these states are known as the three common phases of matter. Solids
have a definite shape and a specific volume, liquids have a definite volume but their shape changes depending on the container
in which they are held, and gases have neither a definite shape nor a specific volume as their molecules move to fill the
container in which they are held. (See Figure 8.2.) Liquids and gases are considered to be fluids because they yield to shearing
forces, whereas solids resist them. Note that the extent to which fluids yield to shearing forces (and hence flow easily and
quickly) depends on a quantity called the viscosity. We can understand the phases of matter and what constitutes a fluid by
considering the forces between atoms that make up matter in the three phases.
Figure 8.2 (a) Atoms in a solid always have the same neighbors, held near home by forces represented here by springs. These atoms are essentially
in contact with one another. A rock is an example of a solid. This rock retains its shape because of the forces holding its atoms together. (b) Atoms in a
liquid are also in close contact but can slide over one another. Forces between them strongly resist attempts to push them closer together and also
hold them in close contact. Water is an example of a liquid. Water can flow, but it also remains in an open container because of the forces between its
atoms. (c) Atoms in a gas are separated by distances that are considerably larger than the size of the atoms themselves, and they move about freely. A
gas must be held in a closed container to prevent it from moving out freely.
Atoms in solids are in close contact, with forces between them that allow the atoms to vibrate but not to change positions with
neighboring atoms. (These forces can be thought of as springs that can be stretched or compressed, but not easily broken.)
Thus a solid resists all types of stress. A solid cannot be easily deformed because the atoms that make up the solid are not able
to move about freely. Solids also resist compression, because their atoms form part of a lattice structure in which the atoms are a
relatively fixed distance apart. Under compression, the atoms would be forced into one another. Most of the examples we have
studied so far have involved solid objects which deform very little when stressed.
Connections: Submicroscopic Explanation of Solids and Liquids
Atomic and molecular characteristics explain and underlie the macroscopic characteristics of solids and fluids. This present
section is devoted entirely to the submicroscopic explanation of solids and liquids.
In contrast, liquids deform easily when stressed and do not spring back to their original shape once the force is removed
because the atoms are free to slide about and change neighbors—that is, they flow (so they are a type of fluid), with the
molecules held together by their mutual attraction. When a liquid is placed in a container with no lid on, it remains in the
container (providing the container has no holes below the surface of the liquid!). Because the atoms are closely packed, liquids,
like solids, resist compression.
Atoms in gases are separated by distances that are large compared with the size of the atoms. The forces between gas atoms
are therefore very weak, except when the atoms collide with one another. Gases thus not only flow (and are therefore considered
to be fluids) but they are relatively easy to compress because there is much space and little force between atoms. When placed
in an open container gases, unlike liquids, will escape. The major distinction is that gases are easily compressed, whereas
liquids are not. We shall generally refer to both gases and liquids simply as fluids, and make a distinction between them only
when they behave differently.
8.2 Density
Which weighs more, a ton of feathers or a ton of bricks? This old riddle plays with the distinction between mass and density. A
ton is a ton, of course; but bricks have much greater density than feathers, and so we are tempted to think of them as heavier.
(See Figure 8.3.)
Density, as you will see, is an important characteristic of substances. It is crucial, for example, in determining whether an object
sinks or floats in a fluid. Density is the mass per unit volume of a substance or object. In equation form, density is defined as
196 Chapter 8 | Fluids
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12