final angular velocity is equivalent to one revolution in 8.71 s (determination of the time period is left as an exercise for the
reader), which is about right for a lazy Susan.
Making Connections: Conservation Laws
Angular momentum, like energy and linear momentum, is conserved. This universally applicable law is another sign of
underlying unity in physical laws. Angular momentum is conserved when net external torque is zero, just as linear
momentum is conserved when the net external force is zero.
Conservation of Angular Momentum
We can now understand why Earth keeps on spinning. As we saw in the previous example, ΔL = (net τ)Δt . This equation
means that, to change angular momentum, a torque must act over some period of time. Because Earth has a large angular
momentum, a large torque acting over a long time is needed to change its rate of spin. So what external torques are there? Tidal
friction exerts torque that is slowing Earth’s rotation, but tens of millions of years must pass before the change is very significant.
Recent research indicates the length of the day was 18 h some 900 million years ago. Only the tides exert significant retarding
torques on Earth, and so it will continue to spin, although ever more slowly, for many billions of years.
What we have here is, in fact, another conservation law. If the net torque is zero, then angular momentum is constant or
conserved. We can see this rigorously by considering net τ = ΔL
Δt for the situation in which the net torque is zero. In that case,
(7.49)netτ = 0
implying that
(7.50)ΔL
Δt = 0.
If the change in angular momentum ΔL is zero, then the angular momentum is constant; thus,
(7.51)L = constant (net τ = 0)
or
(7.52)L = L′(netτ = 0).
These expressions are the law of conservation of angular momentum. Conservation laws are as scarce as they are
important.
An example of conservation of angular momentum is seen in Figure 7.15, in which an ice skater is executing a spin. The net
torque on her is very close to zero, because there is relatively little friction between her skates and the ice and because the
friction is exerted very close to the pivot point. (Both F and r are small, and so τ is negligibly small.) Consequently, she can
spin for quite some time. She can do something else, too. She can increase her rate of spin by pulling her arms and legs in. Why
does pulling her arms and legs in increase her rate of spin? The answer is that her angular momentum is constant, so that
(7.53)L = L′.
Expressing this equation in terms of the moment of inertia,
(7.54)Iω = I′ω′,
where the primed quantities refer to conditions after she has pulled in her arms and reduced her moment of inertia. Because I′
is smaller, the angular velocity ω′ must increase to keep the angular momentum constant. The change can be dramatic, as the
following example shows.
Chapter 7 | Rotation 185