angular acceleration:
angular momentum:
angular velocity:
change in angular velocity:
law of conservation of angular momentum:
lever arm:
precession:
radian:
right-hand rule:
rotational inertia:
rotational kinetic energy:
tangential acceleration:
torque:
Check Your Understanding
Rotational kinetic energy is associated with angular momentum? Does that mean that rotational kinetic energy is a vector?
Solution
No, energy is always a scalar whether motion is involved or not. No form of energy has a direction in space and you can see
that rotational kinetic energy does not depend on the direction of motion just as linear kinetic energy is independent of the
direction of motion.
Glossary
the rate of change of angular velocity with time
the product of moment of inertia and angular velocity
the rate of change of angular position with time
the difference between final and initial values of angular velocity
angular momentum is conserved, i.e., the initial angular momentum is equal to
the final angular momentum when no external torque is applied to the system
the perpendicular distance between the center of rotation and the point at which force is being applied
a type of motion that an object possessing angular momentum undergoes, as a torque perpendicular to the
direction of angular momentum is applied, causing the direction of angular momentum to change; the circular wobbling
motion traced by a slightly tilted circular top is an example
a unit of angular measure defined by the arc length covered by the angle divided by the radius of the circle that the
arc length is part of; one full circle is 2π radians.
direction of angular velocity ω and angular momentum L in which the thumb of your right hand points when
you curl your fingers in the direction of the disk’s rotation
resistance to change of angular velocity; also called moment of inertia; for a point mass, I = mr2
the kinetic energy due to the rotation of an object. This is part of its total kinetic energy
the acceleration in a direction tangent to the circle at the point of interest in circular motion
the turning effectiveness of a force
Section Summary
7.1 Angular Acceleration
• Uniform circular motion is the motion with a constant angular velocity ω = Δθ
Δt .
• In non-uniform circular motion, the velocity changes with time and the rate of change of angular velocity (i.e. angular
acceleration) is α = Δω
Δt .
• Linear or tangential acceleration refers to changes in the magnitude of velocity but not its direction, given as at = Δv
Δt .
• Linear or tangential motion variables x , v , and at are proportional to the rotational quantities θ , ω , and α . They are
also proportional to the radius r of the rotational motion.
7.2 Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia
• The farther the force is applied from the pivot, the greater is the angular acceleration; angular acceleration is inversely
proportional to mass.
• The torque applied on an object is given by lever arm times the applied force: τ = rF .
• Using the torque, we can discover the rotational version of Newton's Second Law. It says τ = Iα , where I is rotational
inertia, defined for a point mass moving in a circle of radius r as I = mr2 .
• The formula for rotational inertia of an extended body can be complicated. But they are all proportional to the mass of the
object and proportional to the square of the size of the object.
190 Chapter 7 | Rotation
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12