Figure 7.3 This figure shows uniform circular motion and some of its defined quantities.
Angular velocity is not constant when a skater pulls in her arms (speeding up for some reason, which we'll look at why later),
when a child starts up a merry-go-round from rest, or when a computer’s hard disk slows to a halt when switched off. In all these
cases, there is an angular acceleration, in which ω changes. The faster the change occurs, the greater the angular
acceleration. Angular acceleration α is defined as the rate of change of angular velocity. In equation form, angular acceleration
is expressed as follows:
(7.5)α = Δω
Δt ,
where Δω is the change in angular velocity and Δt is the change in time. The units of angular acceleration are (rad/s)/s ,
or rad/s2 . If ω increases, then α is positive. If ω decreases, then α is negative. Hopefully all this sounds rather familiar
from a similar discussion in linear kinematics.
Example 7.1 Calculating the Angular Acceleration and Deceleration of a Bike Wheel
Suppose a teenager puts her bicycle on its back and starts the rear wheel spinning from rest to a final angular velocity of
250 rpm in 5.00 s. (a) Calculate the angular acceleration in rad/s2 . (b) If she now slams on the brakes, causing an angular
acceleration of – 87.3 rad/s2 , how long does it take the wheel to stop?
Strategy for (a)
The angular acceleration can be found directly from its definition in α = Δω
Δt because the final angular velocity and time
are given. We see that Δω is 250 rpm and Δt is 5.00 s.
Solution for (a)
Entering known information into the definition of angular acceleration, we get
(7.6)α = Δω
Δt
= 250 rpm
5.00 s .
Because Δω is in revolutions per minute (rpm) and we want the standard units of rad/s2 for angular acceleration, we
need to convert Δω from rpm to rad/s:
(7.7)Δω = 250 rev
min ⋅ 2π rad
rev ⋅ 1 min
60 sec
= 26.2rad
s .
Entering this quantity into the expression for α , we get
(7.8)α = Δω
Δt
= 26.2 rad/s
5.00 s
= 5.24 rad/s2.
Strategy for (b)
In this part, we know the angular acceleration and the initial angular velocity. We can find the stoppage time by using the
definition of angular acceleration and solving for Δt , yielding
Chapter 7 | Rotation 173