the motor had to work to get the stone spinning. This work went into heat, light, sound, vibration, and considerable rotational
kinetic energy.
Figure 7.10 The motor works in spinning the grindstone, giving it rotational kinetic energy. That energy is then converted to heat, light, sound, and
vibration. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist Seaman Zachary David Bell)
Instead of deriving the formula for rotational kinetic energy by calculating the work done by torque on a rotating object, we can
simply guess the correct formula by analogy. We know the kinetic energy in linear, or translational motion, KE = 1
2mv2 . We
can find the rotational version of kinetic energy by replacing mass m with rotational version of mass, rotational inertia I , and by
replacing speed v with rotational speed ω . Rotational speed is measured in units of radians per second. With these
replacements, we get the formula for rotational kinetic energy,
(7.20)KErot = 1
2Iω2.
Rotational kinetic energy has important effects. Flywheels, for example, can be used to store large amounts of rotational kinetic
energy in a vehicle, as seen in Figure 7.11.
Figure 7.11 Experimental vehicles, such as this bus, have been constructed in which rotational kinetic energy is stored in a large flywheel. When the
bus goes down a hill, its transmission converts its gravitational potential energy into KErot . It can also convert translational kinetic energy, when the
bus stops, into KErot . The flywheel’s energy can then be used to accelerate, to go up another hill, or to keep the bus from going against friction.
Helicopter pilots are quite familiar with rotational kinetic energy. They know, for example, that a point of no return will be reached
if they allow their blades to slow below a critical angular velocity during flight. The blades lose lift, and it is impossible to
immediately get the blades spinning fast enough to regain it. Rotational kinetic energy must be supplied to the blades to get them
to rotate faster, and enough energy cannot be supplied in time to avoid a crash. Because of weight limitations, helicopter engines
are too small to supply both the energy needed for lift and to replenish the rotational kinetic energy of the blades once they have
slowed down. The rotational kinetic energy is put into them before takeoff and must not be allowed to drop below this crucial
level. One possible way to avoid a crash is to use the gravitational potential energy of the helicopter to replenish the rotational
kinetic energy of the blades by losing altitude and aligning the blades so that the helicopter is spun up in the descent. Of course,
if the helicopter’s altitude is too low, then there is insufficient time for the blade to regain lift before reaching the ground.
Example 7.3 Calculating Helicopter Energies
A typical small rescue helicopter, similar to the one in Figure 7.12, has four blades, each is 4.00 m long and has a mass of
50.0 kg. The blades can be approximated as thin rods that rotate about one end of an axis perpendicular to their length. The
helicopter has a total loaded mass of 1000 kg. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy in the blades when they rotate at
300 rpm. (b) Calculate the translational kinetic energy of the helicopter when it flies at 20.0 m/s, and compare it with the
rotational energy in the blades. (c) To what height could the helicopter be raised if all of the rotational kinetic energy could be
used to lift it?
Strategy
Rotational and translational kinetic energies can be calculated from their definitions. The last part of the problem relates to
the idea that energy can change form, in this case from rotational kinetic energy to gravitational potential energy.
Solution for (a)
The rotational kinetic energy is
Chapter 7 | Rotation 179