acceleration is analogous to translational acceleration, and mr2 is analogous to mass (or inertia). The quantity mr2 is called
the rotational inertia or moment of inertia of a point mass m a distance r from the center of rotation.
Figure 7.8 An object is supported by a horizontal frictionless table and is attached to a pivot point by a cord that supplies centripetal force. A force F
is applied to the object perpendicular to the radius r , causing it to accelerate about the pivot point. The force is kept perpendicular to r .
Making Connections: Rotational Motion Dynamics
Dynamics for rotational motion is completely analogous to linear or translational dynamics. Dynamics is concerned with
force and mass and their effects on motion. For rotational motion, we will find direct analogs to force and mass that behave
just as we would expect from our earlier experiences.
Rotational Inertia and Moment of Inertia
Before we can consider the rotation of anything other than a point mass like the one in Figure 7.8, we must extend the idea of
rotational inertia to all types of objects. To expand our concept of rotational inertia, we define the moment of inertia I of an
object to be the sum of mr2 for all the point masses of which it is composed. That is, I = ∑ mr2 . Here I is analogous to m
in translational motion. Because of the distance r , the moment of inertia for any object depends on the chosen axis. Actually,
calculating I is beyond the scope of this text except for one simple case—that of a hoop, which has all its mass at the same
distance from its axis. A hoop’s moment of inertia around its axis is therefore MR2 , where M is its total mass and R its
radius. (We use M and R for an entire object to distinguish them from m and r for point masses.) Figure 7.9 shows a variety
of formulas of rotational inertia for many different shapes (deriving these formulas require calculus). For our purposes, it is good
enough for you to see that rotational inertia is proportional to mass, and that it's proportional to size of object squared. Note that
I has units of mass multiplied by distance squared ( kg ⋅ m2 ), as we might expect from its definition.
The general relationship among torque, moment of inertia, and angular acceleration is
(7.18)net τ = Iα
or
(7.19)α = net τ
I ,
where net τ is the total torque from all forces relative to a chosen axis. For simplicity, we will only consider torques exerted by
forces in the plane of the rotation. Such torques are either positive or negative and add like ordinary numbers. The relationship in
τ = Iα, α = net τ
I is the rotational analog to Newton’s second law and is very generally applicable. This equation is actually
valid for any torque, applied to any object, relative to any axis.
As we might expect, the larger the torque is, the larger the angular acceleration is. For example, the harder a child pushes on a
merry-go-round, the faster it accelerates. Furthermore, the more massive a merry-go-round, the slower it accelerates for the
same torque. The basic relationship between moment of inertia and angular acceleration is that the larger the moment of inertia,
the smaller is the angular acceleration. But there is an additional twist. The moment of inertia depends not only on the mass of
an object, but also on its distribution of mass relative to the axis around which it rotates. For example, it will be much easier to
accelerate a merry-go-round full of children if they stand close to its axis than if they all stand at the outer edge. The mass is the
same in both cases, but the moment of inertia is much larger when the children are at the edge.
Take-Home Experiment
Cut out a circle that has about a 10 cm radius from stiff cardboard. Near the edge of the circle, write numbers 1 to 12 like
hours on a clock face. Position the circle so that it can rotate freely about a horizontal axis through its center, like a wheel.
(You could loosely nail the circle to a wall.) Hold the circle stationary and with the number 12 positioned at the top, attach a
lump of blue putty (sticky material used for fixing posters to walls) at the number 3. How large does the lump need to be to
just rotate the circle? Describe how you can change the moment of inertia of the circle. How does this change affect the
Chapter 7 | Rotation 177