change in momentum:
conservation of momentum principle:
elastic collision:
impulse:
inelastic collision:
linear momentum:
perfectly inelastic collision:
second law of motion:
(5.44)KE′int = 1
2m1 v′1
2 + 1
2m2 v′2
2
= 1
2
⎛
⎝0.350 kg⎞
⎠(-4.00 m/s)2 + 1
2
⎛
⎝0.500 kg⎞
⎠(3.70 m/s)2
= 6.22 J.
The change in total kinetic energy is thus
(5.45)KE′int − KEint = 6.22 J − 0.763 J
= 5.46 J.
Discussion
The final velocity of cart 2 is large and positive, meaning that it is moving to the right after the collision. The total kinetic
energy in this collision increases by 5.46 J. That energy was released by the spring.
Glossary
the difference between the final and initial momentum; the mass times the change in velocity
when the net external force is zero, the total momentum of the system is conserved
or constant
a collision that also conserves total kinetic energy, in addition to the total momentum
the average net external force times the time it acts; equal to the change in momentum
a collision in which total kinetic energy is not conserved
the product of mass and velocity
a collision in which the colliding objects stick together
physical law that states that the net external force equals the change in momentum of a system
divided by the time over which it changes
Section Summary
5.1 Linear Momentum and Force
• Linear momentum (momentum for brevity) is defined as the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity.
• In symbols, linear momentum p is defined to be
p = mv,
where m is the mass of the system and v is its velocity.
• The SI unit for momentum is kg · m/s .
• Newton’s second law of motion in terms of momentum states that the net external force equals the change in momentum of
a system divided by the time over which it changes.
• In symbols, Newton’s second law of motion is defined to be
Fnet = Δ p
Δ t ,
where Fnet is the net external force, Δ p is the change in momentum, and Δ t is the change time.
5.2 Impulse
• Impulse is force times duration, and the net impulse, equal to the net external force multiplied by duration, gives the change
in momentum:
Δ p = Fnet Δ t.
• For non-constant net external force, you need to use time-averaged net external force to calculate the impulse over the
duration.
5.3 Conservation of Momentum
• The conservation of momentum principle says that the total momentum is conserved, or constant, in the absence of a net
external force, as a direct consequence of Newton's third law.
• During projectile motion and where air resistance is negligible, momentum is conserved in the horizontal direction because
Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum 139