the very top or the very bottom of the curve.
6.3 Forced Oscillations and Resonance
Figure 6.7 You can cause the strings in a piano to vibrate simply by producing sound waves from your voice. (credit: Matt Billings, Flickr)
Sit in front of a piano sometime and sing a loud brief note at it with the dampers off its strings. It will sing the same note back at
you—the strings, having the same frequencies as your voice, are resonating in response to the forces from the sound waves that
you sent to them. Your voice and a piano’s strings is a good example of the fact that objects—in this case, piano strings—can be
forced to oscillate but oscillate best at their natural frequency. In this section, we shall briefly explore applying a periodic driving
force acting on a simple harmonic oscillator. The driving force puts energy into the system at a certain frequency, not necessarily
the same as the natural frequency of the system. The natural frequency is the frequency at which a simple harmonic oscillator
oscillates, if there is no damping force, and other than an initial kick to get the motion started, there is no driving force. A
damping force is a frictional force (friction, air resistance, and other forces that lead to decrease in mechanical energy) which
converts the mechanical energy of the oscillatory motion into thermal energy.
Most of us have played with toys involving an object supported on an elastic band, something like the paddle ball suspended
from a finger in Figure 6.8. Imagine the finger in the figure is your finger. At first you hold your finger steady, and the ball bounces
up and down with a small amount of damping. If you move your finger up and down slowly, the ball will follow along without
bouncing much on its own. As you increase the frequency at which you move your finger up and down, the ball will respond by
oscillating with increasing amplitude. When you drive the ball at its natural frequency, the ball’s oscillations increase in amplitude
with each oscillation for as long as you drive it. The phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency equal to its natural
frequency is called resonance. A system being driven at its natural frequency is said to resonate. As the driving frequency gets
progressively higher than the resonant or natural frequency, the amplitude of the oscillations becomes smaller, until the
oscillations nearly disappear and your finger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ball.
Figure 6.8 The paddle ball on its rubber band moves in response to the finger supporting it. If the finger moves with the natural frequency f0 of the
ball on the rubber band, then a resonance is achieved, and the amplitude of the ball’s oscillations increases dramatically. At higher and lower driving
frequencies, energy is transferred to the ball less efficiently, and it responds with lower-amplitude oscillations.
Figure 6.9 shows a graph of the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the periodic force
driving it. There are three curves on the graph, each representing a different amount of damping. All three curves peak at the
point where the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the harmonic oscillator. The highest peak, or
greatest response, is for the least amount of damping, because less energy is removed by the damping force.
150 Chapter 6 | Oscillations and Waves
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12