Figure 5.2 A graph of force versus time with time along the x -axis and force along the y -axis for an actual force and an equivalent effective force.
The areas under the two curves are equal.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Hand Movement and Impulse
Try catching a ball while “giving” with the ball, pulling your hands toward your body. Then, try catching a ball while keeping
your hands still. Hit water in a tub with your full palm. After the water has settled, hit the water again by diving your hand with
your fingers first into the water. (Your full palm represents a swimmer doing a belly flop and your diving hand represents a
swimmer doing a dive.) Explain what happens in each case and why. Which orientations would you advise people to avoid
and why?
Making Connections: Constant Force and Constant Acceleration
The assumption of a constant force in the definition of impulse is analogous to the assumption of a constant acceleration in
kinematics. In both cases, nature is adequately described without the use of calculus.
5.3 Conservation of Momentum
In the previous sections in this chapter, changes in momentum for an object were considered in terms of impulse and force. But
for certain conditions, the total momentum is conserved (stays constant). What are these conditions?
The answer to this question entails considering a sufficiently large system. It is always possible to find a larger system in which
total momentum is constant, even if momentum changes for components of the system. If a football player runs into the goalpost
in the end zone, there will be a force on him that causes him to bounce backward. However, the Earth also recoils —conserving
momentum—because of the force applied to it through the goalpost. Because Earth is many orders of magnitude more massive
than the player, its recoil is immeasurably small and can be neglected in any practical sense, but it is real nevertheless.
Consider what happens if the masses of two colliding objects are more similar (i.e, both objects are about the same mass) than
the masses of a football player and Earth—for example, one car bumping into another, as shown in Figure 5.3. Both cars are
coasting in the same direction when the lead car (labeled m2) is bumped by the trailing car (labeled m1). The only unbalanced
force on each car is the force of the collision. (Assume that the effects due to friction are negligible.) Car 1 slows down as a result
of the collision, losing some momentum, while car 2 speeds up and gains some momentum. We shall now show that the total
momentum of the two-car system remains constant.
Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum 131