Figure 5.3 A car of mass m1 moving with a velocity of v1 bumps into another car of mass m2 and velocity v2 that it is following. As a result, the
first car slows down to a velocity of v′1 and the second speeds up to a velocity of v′2 . The momentum of each car is changed, but the total
momentum ptot of the two cars is the same before and after the collision (if you assume friction is negligible).
Using the definition of impulse, the change in momentum of car 1 is given by
(5.16)Δp1 = F1Δt,
where F1 is the force on car 1 due to car 2, and Δt is the time the force acts (the duration of the collision). Similarly, the
change in momentum of car 2 is
(5.17)Δp2 = F2Δt,
where F2 is the force on car 2 due to car 1, and, intuitively, the duration of the collision Δt is the same for both cars. We know
from Newton’s third law that F2 = – F1 , and so
(5.18)Δp2 = −F1Δt = −Δp1.
Thus, the changes in momentum cancel out, and
(5.19)Δp1 + Δp2 = 0.
Because the changes in momentum add to zero, the total momentum of the two-car system is constant. That is,
(5.20)p1 + p2 = constant.
Because of Newton's third law, when two objects in a system interact with each other, it does not change the total momentum of
the system. In the absence of an external force (that is, force due to an object outside of the system, so that we can ignore the
impulse due to the reaction force), the total momentum of the system is constant, or conserved. We call this the conservation of
momentum principle.
We have noted that the motion in perpendicular directions— x , y , and z —are independent. Momentum conservation follows
this paradigm, and components of total momentum along each direction are conserved separately. For example, during projectile
motion and where air resistance is negligible, momentum is conserved in the horizontal direction because horizontal forces are
zero and momentum is unchanged. But along the vertical direction, the net vertical force is not zero and the momentum of the
projectile is not conserved. (See Figure 5.4.) However, if the momentum of the projectile-Earth system is considered in the
vertical direction, we find that the total momentum is conserved.
132 Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12