5.5 Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
We have seen that in an elastic collision, total kinetic energy is conserved. An inelastic collision is one in which the total kinetic
energy changes (it is not conserved). This lack of conservation means that the forces between colliding objects may remove or
add total kinetic energy. Work done by internal forces may change the forms of energy within a system. For inelastic collisions,
such as when colliding objects stick together, this internal work may transform some kinetic energy into thermal energy. Or it may
convert stored energy into total kinetic energy, such as when exploding bolts separate a satellite from its launch vehicle.
Inelastic Collision
An inelastic collision is one in which the total kinetic energy changes (it is not conserved).
Figure 5.6 shows an example of an inelastic collision. Two objects that have equal masses head toward one another at equal
speeds and then stick together. Their total kinetic energy is initially 1
2mv2 + 1
2mv2 = mv2 . The two objects come to rest after
sticking together, conserving total momentum. And the total kinetic energy is zero after this collision. A collision in which the
objects stick together is called a perfectly inelastic collision because it reduces the total kinetic energy as much as possible,
while conserving total momentum.
Perfectly Inelastic Collision
A collision in which the objects stick together is sometimes called “perfectly inelastic.”
Figure 5.6 An inelastic one-dimensional two-object collision. Momentum is conserved, but total kinetic energy is not conserved. (a) Two objects of
equal mass initially head directly toward one another at the same speed. (b) The objects stick together (a perfectly inelastic collision), and so their final
velocity is zero.
Example 5.4 Calculating Velocity and Change in Kinetic Energy: Inelastic Collision of a Puck
and a Goalie
(a) Find the recoil velocity of a 70.0-kg ice hockey goalie, originally at rest, who catches a 0.150-kg hockey puck slapped at
him at a velocity of 35.0 m/s. (b) How much kinetic energy is lost during the collision? Assume friction between the ice and
the puck-goalie system is negligible. (See Figure 5.7 )
Figure 5.7 An ice hockey goalie catches a hockey puck and recoils backward. The initial kinetic energy of the puck is almost entirely converted to
thermal energy and sound in this inelastic collision.
136 Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12