horizontal forces are zero.
5.4 Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
• An elastic collision is one that conserves total kinetic energy.
• Conservation of kinetic energy and momentum together allow the final velocities to be calculated in terms of initial velocities
and masses in one dimensional two-body collisions.
5.5 Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
• An inelastic collision is one in which the total kinetic energy changes (it is not conserved).
• A collision in which the objects stick together is sometimes called perfectly inelastic because it reduces total kinetic energy
as much as possible while conserving total momentum.
Conceptual Questions
5.1 Linear Momentum and Force
1. An object that has a small mass and an object that has a large mass have the same momentum. Which object has the largest
kinetic energy?
2. An object that has a small mass and an object that has a large mass have the same kinetic energy. Which mass has the
largest momentum?
3. Professional Application
Football coaches advise players to block, hit, and tackle with their feet on the ground rather than by leaping through the air.
Using the concepts of momentum, work, and energy, explain how a football player can be more effective with his feet on the
ground.
4. How can a small force impart the same momentum to an object as a large force?
5.2 Impulse
5. Professional Application
Explain in terms of impulse how padding reduces forces in a collision. State this in terms of a real example, such as the
advantages of a carpeted vs. tile floor for a day care center.
6. While jumping on a trampoline, sometimes you land on your back and other times on your feet. In which case can you reach a
greater height and why?
7. Professional Application
Tennis racquets have “sweet spots.” If the ball hits a sweet spot then the player's arm is not jarred as much as it would be
otherwise. Explain why this is the case.
5.3 Conservation of Momentum
8. Professional Application
If you dive into water, you reach greater depths than if you do a belly flop. Explain this difference in depth using the concept of
conservation of energy. Explain this difference in depth using what you have learned in this chapter.
9. Under what circumstances is momentum conserved?
10. Can momentum be conserved for a system if there are external forces acting on the system? If so, under what conditions? If
not, why not?
11. Momentum for a system can be conserved in one direction while not being conserved in another. What is the angle between
the directions? Give an example.
12. Professional Application
Explain in terms of momentum and Newton’s laws how a car’s air resistance is due in part to the fact that it pushes air in its
direction of motion.
13. Can objects in a system have momentum while the momentum of the system is zero? Explain your answer.
14. Must the total energy of a system be conserved whenever its momentum is conserved? Explain why or why not.
5.4 Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
15. What physical quantities are conserved in an elastic collision?
16. Give examples of elastic (or nearly elastic) collisions from everyday experiences.
5.5 Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
17. What is an inelastic collision? What is a perfectly inelastic collision?
140 Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://legacy.cnx.org/content/col25183/1.12