which it changes. Using symbols, this law is
(5.7)
Fnet = Δ p
Δ t ,
where Fnet is the net external force, Δ p is the change in momentum, and Δ t is the change in time.
Newton’s Second Law of Motion in Terms of Momentum
The net external force equals the change in momentum of a system divided by the time over which it changes:
Fnet = Δ p / Δ t .
Making Connections: Force and Momentum
Force and momentum are intimately related. Force acting over time can change momentum, and Newton’s second law of
motion, can be stated in its most broadly applicable form in terms of momentum. Momentum continues to be a key concept
in the study of atomic and subatomic particles in quantum mechanics.
This statement of Newton’s second law of motion includes the more familiar Fnet = ma as a special case. We can derive this
form as follows. First, note that the change in momentum Δ p is given by
(5.8)Δ p = Δ (mv).
If the mass of the system is constant, then
(5.9)Δ (mv) = m Δ v.
So that for constant mass, Newton’s second law of motion becomes
(5.10)
Fnet = Δ p
Δ t = m Δ v
Δ t
Because Δ v
Δ t = a , we get the familiar equation
(5.11)Fnet = ma
when the mass of the system is constant.
Newton’s second law of motion stated in terms of momentum is more generally applicable because it can be applied to systems
where the mass is changing, such as rockets, as well as to systems of constant mass. We will consider systems with varying
mass in some detail; however, the relationship between momentum and force remains useful when mass is constant, such as in
the following example.
Example 5.2 Calculating Force: Venus Williams’ Racquet
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a premier women’s match, reaching a speed
of 58 m/s (209 km/h). What is the average force exerted on the 0.057-kg tennis ball by Venus Williams’ racquet, assuming
that the ball’s speed just after impact is 58 m/s, that the initial horizontal component of the velocity before impact is
negligible, and that the ball remained in contact with the racquet for 5.0 ms (milliseconds)?
Strategy
This problem involves only one dimension because the ball starts from having no horizontal velocity component before
impact. Newton’s second law stated in terms of momentum is then written as Fnet = Δ p / Δ t .
As noted above, when mass is constant, the change in momentum is given by
(5.12)Δp = mΔv = m(vf − vi).
In this example, the velocity just after impact and the change in time are given; thus, once Δp is calculated, Fnet = Δp
Δt
can be used to find the force.
Solution
To determine the change in momentum, substitute the values for the initial and final velocities into the equation above.
Chapter 5 | Impulse and Momentum 129